COMMUNICATIONS
MANUAL

Communications Officer / 911 Operator

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

Copyright Notice
All materials contained within this manual, unless otherwise noted, are protected by United States copyright law
and may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, displayed, published or broadcast without the prior written
of the author, Kelly C. Bullion, or in the case of third-party materials, the owner of that content. You may not
alter or remove any trademark, copyright or other notice from copies of the content.

Furthermore, the contents of this manual, having been written and created for express use by the Ruidoso
Police Department and the Communications Training Officers therein, may be reproduced and utilized by the
Ruidoso Police Department for use within the agency as often as required and/or requested for effective and
efficient use within their training curriculum and program, without penalty.

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

TABLE OF CONTENTS
BASIC ORIENTATION

PAGES 1

Training Overview
Trainee Expectations
Things to Remember
Orientation Overview
Division Structure
Communications Officer Uniform Expectations
Communications Officer Conduct
DISPATCHER DUTIES

PAGES

Radio Traffic
Telephone Traffic
Generating Call Cards/ Maintaining records
Dissemination of Info. & Notifications
Pawn Tickets/Criminal Trespass/Citations/NCIC enteries
Maintenance of workspace
CALL-TAKING

PAGES

Telephone and Facsimile systems
E911 Operations
Basic call-taking facts
Emergency Medical Dispatch (EMD)
Things to Remember
Types of Callers
Questioning and Listening Techniques
Things to Think About
Media System
Call Prioritization
Crime Stoppers Tips
Call-Specific Questioning
Accidents – Aircraft Down
ACTIVE SHOOTER
Alarms – Armed Subject
Bank Alarm
Barking Dogs – BOLO
Bomb Threat
BOMB RESPONSE
Cats – Code Enforcement
Criminal Damage – Drunken/Impaired Subject
Embezzlement – Fire (Forest)
Fire (Structure)
Fire Department Structure Fire Protocol
Flood – Gas Skip
Gun Shot / Stabbing Victim – Hazardous Materials
Kidnapping / Child Enticement – Loose Dogs
Medical Calls – Narcotics Violation / Drugs Call
Open Door/Window – Rape
Robbery – Shooting
Shoplifting – Stolen Vehicle
Suicide/Attempted Suicide – Trespassing
Unattended Death – Vicious Animal
Welfare Check – Wild Animals
RADIO OPERATIONS
Channels, Volume, Paging Functions, Etiquette

PAGES

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

TABLE OF CONTENTS
COMPUTER AIDED DISPATCH (CAD)
Login, CAD Window Orientation, Hot sheet

PAGES

NCIC (National Crime Information Center
NCIC Basics, Logging into NCIC
Vehicle Checks,
Person/OLD Checks
Non-Automated States, Criminal History (III) checks
Query articles, Query Guns
Hit Confirmations, Locate Teletype
Clearances, Administrative Messages
Broadcast Messages, Fatal Form
Amber Alert, Article Entry
Gun Entry
License Plate Entry
Vehicle Entry
Wanted Person Entry

PAGES

Wanted Person Supplementals, Modifies, Packet assembly

Wanted Person Validations
Missing Person Entry
NCIC Procedural Updates
Requirements for TAC (Terminal Agency Coordinator)
REFERENCE SHEETS
Wrecker Companies
Other Agencies Numbers
Radio 10-Codes
Radio 900-Codes
Radio Codes Phonetics
Mark Out Codes
Call Category Codes
TDD Telecommunications Device for the Deaf Protocol
US Postal State Codes
Ruidoso PD Officer Roster
Ruidoso PD Phone Extensions

PAGES

[Type here]

BASIC ORIENTATION

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

TRAINING OVERVIEW

Communications Officers perform communications duties for Police, Fire, and EMS for the local community and
surrounding area. They answer calls for service, both emergency and non-emergency, and dispatch police, fire
and medic responders and equipment to handle almost any type of situation. Communications personnel
provide that vital first link to the emergency and assistance resources for the community. Your performance as
a Communications professional directly contributes to the safety and well-being of the emergency personnel
and citizens of the community. The purpose of this training program is to assure that Communications Trainees
are equipped with the knowledge and abilities to adequately and professionally provide the first link services
and information that are so essential to the safety, convenience and well-being of the personnel and citizens
they serve.
Each trainee will be assigned to a trainer for three phases of training. Each phase will last a minimum of four
weeks. At the end of each phase, or at the end of the final phase, additional training may be scheduled if and
when necessary. Any days missed from work during the training period must be made up. During the training
period, the trainee will be expected to proficiently orient, learn and accustom themselves with all topics, concepts
and materials covered in the manual, as well as any information discussed and covered outside by the trainer.
Basic training may include familiarization with generic dispatch training guides (Provided by PowerPhone™),
computerized dispatch training (provided by CritiCall™), and the Departmental Communications Trainee
manual. Additional training will also include hands-on experience in dispatch, and ride-alongs with field units
when possible (to be scheduled at the trainer’s discretion). Each section of training will include testing. Tests
will be written, practical, or a combination thereof. At the end of the training phase, the trainee will be placed in
a “shadow” or “ghost” phase. This is the final section of training prior to being released from the training program.
During this phase, the trainee will be observed by the trainer without any interaction on the trainer’s part. In
effect, the trainee is on their own, with the trainer stepping in to assist or correct only if it is life threatening, or
the trainee becomes too overwhelmed to adequately handle the functions and performance of their job on their
own. Daily Observation Reports (D.O.R.s) will also be completed on the trainee until such time as training is
complete. A sample of the D.O.R. is included in the manual for the trainee’s review.
Upon completion of the training period, the trainee will be assigned a shift and days off. At the time of the next
shift bid, the trainee will be allowed to participate in the bid for shift and days off in accordance with shift-bid
policy and by seniority.
If a trainee feels that they are not being properly trained, or have any type of conflict with any trainer, they may
speak with the Dispatch Supervisor. If required by the Dispatch Supervisor, the trainee will submit an interoffice
memorandum with regard to their complaint. The Dispatch Supervisor will review the matter, discuss it with the
trainer, and then make a decision. The Dispatch Supervisor’s decision on the matter shall be final.
If the trainee feels that they need more time on a certain topic, it is their responsibility to request it in writing in
the form of an interoffice memorandum, submitted to the trainer. The trainer will then submit it to the Dispatch
Supervisor for review.

Acknowledgement:

Trainee Signature

Printed Name

Date

Trainer Signature

Printed Name

Date

8

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

TRAINEE EXPECTATIONS

EXPECTATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE COMMUNICATIONS TRAINEE:
Ø Show up on time for your assigned shift. This assures that you are prepared and ready to work before
the outgoing shift leaves. Failure to show up on time will result in one verbal warning. Failure to heed
the verbal warning will result in written disciplinary action for each subsequent violation. The shifts run
as follows:
§
§
§

0655 – 1500 (Day Shift)
1455 – 2300 (Swing Shift)
2255 – 0700 (Night Shift)

Ø Dress in accordance with uniform requirements
Ø Act professionally at all times.
Ø Maintain a clean and organized work space.
Ø Learn Departmental documentation and operational procedures, even if it requires extra study outside
of work.
Ø Obtain a basic working knowledge of streets, landmarks and businesses in your working jurisdiction. A
good way to learn geography, if you are unfamiliar, is to explore the local neighborhoods on your days
off, making notes if necessary.
Ø Ask questions when needed. Ask your trainer. Ask your co-workers. Ask your supervisors. You’ll
never learn the answer if you are afraid to ask.
Ø Communicate well, to the best of your ability, and make sure your comments are appropriate.
Ø Learn information presented to you in a timely manner.
Ø Take initiative. Do your best to think through problems on your own, when you can, and determine the
proper course of action.
Ø Use “down time” efficiently. Do not expect to be told what to do all the time.
Ø Demonstrate a basic understanding of emergency communications upon completion of the program,
with a continuance to learn after the training period is complete.

Acknowledgement:

Trainee Signature

Printed Name

Date

Trainer Signature

Printed Name

Date

8

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

THINGS TO REMEMBER

HELPFUL THINGS TO REMEMBER:
Ø Our primary purpose as Communications Officers is to maintain the safety of the emergency responders,
as well as the public’s safety. All other functions are secondary. Therefore, if your trainer jumps in and
takes over a call, do not take it personally. It is our job as trainers to assure that the safety of the public
and the responders is first and foremost. Sometimes that requires that we jump in and handle things
until you have mastered the task.
Ø Ratings on your Daily Observation Report (D.O.R.) are not a personal attack on you. They are meant
to be used as tools to help you better understand where you need improvement in your performance.
Also, remember that just because you were rated low in a category today, does not mean that your
performance of the task has been substandard for the entire training period. That is why they are called
DAILY observations. If you feel that a rating is unfair, you are allowed the opportunity to make comment
on the D.O.R. without fear of retribution. Please utilize that opportunity. It makes us better trainers.
Ø During your training period, the television will remain off, unless turning it on is useful in the performance
of your duty. (For example, turning on the Weather Channel to determine incoming storms, or utilizing
the local news cast to assist in disseminating information to the public.) The use of the Internet may
also be restricted if deemed necessary by your trainer. Cell phones and tablets will not be allowed
except in case of emergency.
Ø You may feel as if you are being treated as an outsider when you first start working. This is not
intentional. As a public safety employee, you are entrusted with a lot of confidential information. You
are also entrusted with the life and safety of the Police, Firefighters, and Paramedics that you dispatch.
Until you have been working long enough to demonstrate your ability to be trusted with that responsibility,
it may seem like you are not completely a part of the team. Relax. Maintain your dependability and
professionalism, and it will come with time.

Acknowledgement:

Trainee Signature

Printed Name

Date

Trainer Signature

Printed Name

Date

8

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

ORIENTATION OVERVIEW
Objective:
To introduce the communications trainee to the operational structures and procedures of the Police Department and to
provide the trainee with an orientation to the basic elements and tools necessary to function adequately in their position
as a Communications Officer.
Elements:
A.

Police Department Orientation/Tour
1. Trainee will be provided a tour of the premises in order to familiarize them with location of personnel
offices and mailboxes.
a. Reception area
b. Mailboxes
c. Records
d. 911 Coordinator
e. Sallyport
f. Interview room
g. Jail/Holding
h. Detectives’ Division (CID)
i. Evidence/Property Technician
j. Animal Control/Code Enforcement’s Office
k. Chief’s Office
l. Administrative secretary/Office Supervisor
m. Conference room
n. Lieutenant’s Office
o. Victims’ Advocate’s Office
p. Patrol and Sergeants’ Office
q. Training/briefing room
r. Employee workout/PT area
s. Narcotics Safe
t. New Mexico State Police (NMSP) District 8 sub-office

B.

Communications Division Orientation
1. Trainee will be provided with an orientation of the communications center in order to familiarize them with
the location of equipment and supplies necessary to the performance of their duties.
a. Radio/CAD/911/NCIC Consoles
b. Timesheets, Overtime, Leave Request and Training Request forms
c. Bank Alarm/Responder Information
d. NCIC manuals and related materials
e. SLEUTH manual
f. Village Code of Ordinances and State Criminal & Traffic Law Manual
g. MSDS and HazMat Manuals
h. Natural Gas Pipeline ERG
i. Criminal Trespass/On-call/Crimestoppers/TRO binders
j. Video Recording Equipment
k. NM Courts Addressing Binder
l. AM Folder/Citation Codes

8

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL
POLICE DEPARTMENT/COMMUNICATIONS DIVISION STRUCTURE

Command Structure
v Chain of Command for the Communications Officer is as follows
o Communication Trainee
o Communications Trainer
o Dispatch Supervisor
o Consolidated Dispatch Board
v Chain of Command is to be adhered to at all times. Failure to adhere to the command structure as outlined can
result in disciplinary action.
v Civilian employees and administration employees are not in the communications officer’s direct chain of
command with regard to orders or grievances.
v Grievances and complaints must be addressed through chain of command and submitted in accordance with the
Village Of Ruidoso Policy Manual.
Civilian and commissioned employees
v Civilian positions include:
o Records Clerk
o Administrative Secretary/Office Supervisor
o Victims’ Advocate
o Code Enforcement
o Communications Officer
§ Communications Officers are LEA certified, but are still classed as civilian employees.
v Commissioned positions include:
o Patrol Officers
o Corporals
o Sergeants
o Detectives
o Lieutenants
o Chief of Police

8

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL
COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER UNIFORM EXPECTATIONS

Uniform Appearance/Personal Hygiene
v Employees shall maintain a smart, conservative, well-groomed appearance.
o Men: Hair must be neatly combed and styled; sideburns may be worn, but may not extend past the base
of the ear. Hair in the back of the head must not extend below the base of the collar, & the length in the
front may not extend below the tops of the eyebrows. Non-traditional styles and unnatural colors are not
permitted.
o Women: Hair must be neatly combed and styled. Buns, braids and ponytails are permitted only if they are
neat and well-kept. Hairstyles that are disheveled or unkempt in appearance are not permitted. Make-up
must be conservative and in good taste, appearing natural. Non-traditional styles and unnatural colors are
not permitted.
v Employees are to wear appropriate attire, appearing professional, each and every day that they report for duty.
v Employees will be required to be clean and maintain effective hygiene, as well as to wear clean, conservative
clothing that presents a professional appearance.
o Clothing must be clean and never wrinkled. All seams must be finished.
o Golf shirts, polo shirts, casual button-down shirts and well-fitting dress t-shirts are permitted as are casual
trousers and jeans.
o Footwear must be, well-kept. Boots or dress shoes are preferred, but not required.
o Prohibited attire: Clothing that reveals too much cleavage, the back, abdomen, or underwear; clothing that
is torn, dirty or frayed; clothing displaying words, terms or pictures that may be in any way construed as
offensive;
v Employees are required to use good judgement in work clothes and remember to conduct yourself at all times in
a way that best represents you and the Village of Ruidoso when attending trainings, meetings, or any other
assignments.

8

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL
COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER CONDUCT

Expected Conduct/General Conduct
v Treatment and interaction with co-workers and supervisors
o Employees shall display respect for their superior officers, subordinates and associates. When on-duty
and in the presence of the public, co-workers shall be referred to by rank or title.
o Employees will address their subordinates, associates, supervisors and members of the general public
with courtesy and will not use abusive, violent insulting or provoking language that may be deemed
offensive.
v Engaging in gossip or criticism
o Employees will not engage in gossip or the spreading of rumors detrimental to the department or another
employee.
v Integrity and professional demeanor
o Employees will always display absolute honesty.
o Employees will display a courteous and professional demeanor at all times, maintaining a calm and even
disposition, regardless of provocation.
o Employees will not discuss Police, Fire or EMS activities, cases or calls for service with any member of
the general public, to include the employee’s spouse, significant other or family members.
v Personal associations and contacts
o Employees will restrict personal phone calls, associations and conversations to an appropriate minimum
while on duty. Mobile devices will not be allowed on the floor during training, and use/checking them should
be restricted to breaks.
o Employees are not to utilize cellular devices for any type of picture taking within the working conditions of
the dispatch center. This includes, but is not limited to, any workstation such as CAD, Telephone
Systems, Radios, or NCIC terminals. If an employee fails to adhere to this usage it will result in
disciplinary action, up to and including termination of employee. You can email NCIC pictures to
department emails, from your department email.
o Personal problems involving the employee will be kept separate from their performance of duty. If a
personal issue or problem arises that may prevent the employee from performing their duties appropriately,
the employee may discuss the use of a sick, vacation, compensatory or other type of leave with their
supervisor in order to deal with the issue.
o Each employee shall have his/her current address and telephone number on file in Dispatch. Any change
in address or telephone number shall be reported to the Dispatch Supervisor within 48 hours of the change.
v Prohibited conduct
o Employees are prohibited from being under the influence of any intoxicating liquor or substance while onduty, to include prescription medications.
o Employees are prohibited from the use of any tobacco product while in contact with the public, or while in
any Village vehicle.
o Employees are prohibited from being absent from duty without the prior knowledge and approval of their
supervisor.
v Working hours
o A normal workweek is 40 hours. Personnel will be required to work odd hours, holidays, and weekends.
Shift work is a condition of employment.
o You are required to show up on time for your assigned shift. This assures that you are prepared and ready
to work before the outgoing shift leaves. Failure to show up on time will result in one verbal warning.
Failure to heed the verbal warning will result in written disciplinary action for each subsequent violation.
The shifts run as follows:
• 0655 - 1500 (Day Shift)
• 1455 - 2300 (Swing Shift)
• 2255 – 0700 (Night Shift)

8

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL
COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER CONDUCT (CONT.’D)

v Tardiness
o A tardy employee will be required to submit a letter to the Communications Supervisor explaining such
tardiness
o Frequent tardiness by an employee will result in disciplinary action, up to and including dismissal; per
Village of Ruidoso Policy.
§ 1st offense will result in verbal documented warning.
§ 2nd offense will result in a written reprimand.
§ 3rd offense could result in suspension.
o There will be a review of all documented tardiness that have occurred within a one-year period during an
employee’s performance evaluation.

v Absence from Duty
o Personnel absent from duty without authorization shall be listed as absent without leave. Disciplinary action
may also be taken, pursuant to the personnel rules and regulations of the Village of Ruidoso
o When calling in sick, you are required to make notification to the Dispatch Supervisor. When calling in
sick, you must make notification NO LATER than two hours prior to your scheduled shift. For further
guidelines refer to the Village of Ruidoso Policy.
v Vacation
o No employee shall submit a vacation request in excess of the amount he/she will have accrued at the
time that the vacation is taken.
o Vacation shall normally be approved based on first come, first served. The leave slip is to be given to the
Dispatch supervisor and should be submitted at minimum 3 weeks prior to the vacation. The exception
being last minute “special occasions” or “extenuating circumstances”, the employee will need to meet
with the supervisor.
v Shift Rotation
o Shift Rotation occurs approximately every 4 months
o Shift Bids are done by Sonority (date of hire)
o If you have been on the same shift for 2 rotations, you must rotate off that shift. This could be adjusted
due to staffing issues.
v Relief by oncoming Shift
o Each employee shall remain at his/her station until relieved by the oncoming shift. The oncoming shift
will be briefed as to the status of traffic before accepting responsibility of the radio console
o Employees shall not leave prior to the end of their shift, if relieved early by the oncoming shift.
o Oncoming shift is required to be at the assigned station on or before shift start time to relieve prior shift

8

[Type here]

DISPATCHER DUTIES

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL
RADIO TRAFFIC

ROUTINE TRAFFIC
v The dispatcher’s primary responsibility is to attend to radio traffic. What was, just a few seconds ago, a routine
transmission can quickly become an officer down or high incident call.
v Always pay close attention to radio traffic so that you are always sure of each unit’s location and activity. If you
don’t understand their traffic the first time they give it, ASK THEM TO REPEAT. Always repeat the officer’s location
back to them when they give it to you.
v Occasionally, services and units “cover” one another on the radio, making it impossible to distinguish what unit
was calling or what was said. Never be afraid to tell the units that they were covered, and ask them to 10-9 their
traffic.
v You are the lifeline for the units in the field. Failure to adequately and acceptably perform your duties could mean
that one more father or mother, husband or wife, son or daughter, doesn’t return home at the end of their shift.
ALWAYS TAKE YOUR JOB SERIOUSLY.
EMERGENCY TRAFFIC
v There are occasions when radio traffic becomes emergency in nature. Some of these situations include:
• Bank alarm calls where bank personnel indicates that there may be a robbery in progress.
• Officer down/officer assistance calls
• Officer in pursuit
• Officer not responding to radio
• Armed subjects
• Any in-progress calls with the potential of violence
v In case of emergency traffic, dispatchers and/or officers on the call will call for “10-3” or “10-33.” This means that
all traffic on the radio channel will stop, and the channel will be held open for emergency traffic only. This prevents
all non-essential traffic from interfering with any emergency communications that are occurring or might occur.
v In the event of a channel being called 10-3, the dispatcher will repeat the announcement (“All units, Channel <?>
is 10-3.”), and all non-emergency traffic will switch to an alternate channel (generally RPD-8).
v In the event that a non-emergency transmission is received from a field unit not involved in the emergency call
while the channel has been called 10-3, simply advise the unit calling, “Channel is 10-3.” The field unit should then
take his traffic to the alternate channel to be handled.
v Once the emergency situation has been resolved and or stabilized, units on the scene will advise dispatch that the
channel can be cleared for routine traffic. Dispatch will re-broadcast channel clearance by announcing “All units,
Channel <?> is 10-8.”

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL
TELEPHONE TRAFFIC

ROUTINE TRAFFIC
v Next to radio traffic, telephone traffic is the most important duty a dispatcher performs. The telephone is the main
method that the citizens and community use to request assistance.
v Telephone communications should always be polite and professional at all times. All administrative and 911 lines
are recorded.
v Never assume that just because a call came in on a non-emergency line, that it is not an emergency. Calls that
require emergency assistance are routinely received on administrative lines.
v Dispatchers handle administrative telephone with 4 incoming public lines, 1 incoming inter-agency line, and 1
Crimestoppers tip line.
• Lines are to be answered as follows:
ü Administrative/Inter-agency: “Ruidoso Police Department, this is [name]. How may I help you?”
ü Crimestoppers: “Lincoln Co. Crimestoppers. How may I help you?”
EMERGENCY TRAFFIC
v Most emergency calls come in on 911 lines. ALL 911 calls should be treated as an emergency.
v The state of New Mexico requires that all incoming 911 lines should be answered by identifying what PSAP you
are with. EX: “Ruidoso Area 911, what/where is your emergency?”
v Sometimes open line calls, or calls with garbled noise or voices on the other end of the line are emergency calls.
Someone may have dialed 911 in a last ditch effort to save their lives before they die of a heart attack, or before
they are beaten to death by their spouse. Stroke victims often sound like children playing on the phone, or like
someone making choking noises. Always do your best to cover every angle and make certain the call is not an
emergency.
CALL-TAKING
v When taking information from callers, you will come across all types of people. Always maintain a professional
demeanor and do your best to help the caller, regardless of how they may treat you.
v Watch your tone, volume and pace, and take notes during the call.
v If you must put a caller on hold, let them know. Return as promptly as possible.
v Try to obtain the caller’s name and use it during conversation.
v NEVER ASSUME that every situation is the same. Treat each caller and situation individually.
v REVIEW THE COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER REFERENCE SHEETS ON CALL-TAKING INCLUDED IN YOUR
MANUAL.

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL
GENERATING CALL CARDS/MAINTAINING RECORDS

v Call cards are a record of officer activity and actions taken with regard to calls for service. Call cards may be
citizen, dispatcher or officer initiated. All call cards must be checked for accuracy of detail, times and location. Call
cards can be requested by the public or subpoenaed.
v Dispatch generates three types of call cards:
o Single service: A single emergency service is sent to handle the call.
§ EX: PD sent to handle report of a burglary, not in progress
§ EX: FD is sent to handle a complaint of smoke in the area.
o

Combined service: More than one emergency service is sent to handle the call.
§ EX: EMS and FD are sent to handle report of a male with chest pain.
§ EX: PD, EMS, and FD are sent to a report of a traffic accident with confirmed injuries.
§ EX: FD and PD are sent to handle the removal of a tree down across a roadway.

o

Informational: Generated for informational purposes only. Informational calls include:
§ Wrecker calls: A call card is generated when a wrecker is requested by PD units to remove a
vehicle.
§ Utility calls: Generated when after-hours personnel is called out (i.e. street or water department)
* Note: It is important that there is a call card generated for these calls EACH and EVERY
TIME that after-hours personnel is requested to respond. The other Village departments
rely on these call cards to verify response and call-out pay for the personnel that were
contacted.

o

BOLO/ATL: Generated to advise units to be on the lookout (BOLO) or attempt to locate (ATL) suspects
or vehicles.

o

Close Patrol: Generated to inform officers of requests for increased patrol in certain areas or locations.
§ ALL close patrol calls will have a call card generated, and will then be entered into the HOTSHEET,
with the call number cross reference. Each indication by an officer that they performed the close
patrol will then be documented in the appropriate call with time/date of the check indicated.

MAINTAINING RECORDS

v BOOKING/JAIL LOGS:
o Dispatch is responsible for insuring that the log books for the booking area are notated with times whenever
a prisoner is brought into custody. In addition to maintaining the video recorder log, dispatch is also
responsible for logging the prisoner information and charges into a booking ledger.
v NCIC TRANSACTIONS
o Communications officers are also responsible to maintain a log of each time a request or response for hit
confirmation, or an administrative message is sent via our NCIC terminal. The log is kept in the NCIC
binder on the shelves next to the video recording equipment in dispatch.

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL
DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION & NOTIFICATIONS

v WRECKERS: Officers will request an on-call wrecker from time to time. In the event that occurs, dispatch should
notify the first-call wrecker by contacting all numbers listed for the wrecker until an answer is received, or all
numbers have been tried at least once. In the event that the first-call wrecker does not answer the phone, dispatch
will move to the second-call wrecker. Wrecker rotation schedules are printed by the week and posted at each
radio console.
o Wrecker Companies used by Dispatch:
§ Arrow Towing
§ Downs Towing
§ Herrera Towing
v MEDIA NOTIFICATIONS: On a routine basis, news media will call to ask if anything has happened that might be
newsworthy; or they will call to attempt to obtain information regarding an on-going situation. If an incident has
occurred, or an on-going incident has information that may be related to the media, a press release will have been
typed up by the Public Information Officer (PIO), or the detective in charge, and will have been provided to dispatch.
Read the press release EXACTLY as it is written, or ask if you may fax it to the media source. NEVER GIVE OUT
ANY INFORMATION WITHOUT A PRESS RELEASE.
v WEATHER/ROAD CONDITIONS: Citizens and tourists routinely call the Police Department for updates on
weather and road conditions. You will handle the inquiries as follows:
o Dispatch will answer inquiries by relaying information received from the NM Highway Department, NM
State Police, the Sheriff’s Office, and/or the National Weather Service. When relaying information,
always include the time received and the source. (Time is important because conditions change
rapidly, and the source is pertinent to prevent liability to the Village and the dispatcher relaying the
information.)
o

Never recommend whether or not travel is advised unless the recommendation is part of the
information received. In that case, it should be made clear to the inquirer which agency is making the
recommendation.

o

Respond to local condition inquiries by relaying up-to-the-minute information reports from the units on
the street. It will be made clear that conditions may change in a short period of time and that they may
wish to call back. Again, NEVER recommend whether or not travel is advised.

o

You may also relay the NM Department of Transportation Road Conditions phone number and
website:
WEB ADDR.: http://www.nmroads.com
PHONE NO.: 1-800-432-4269

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL
CITATIONS / CRIMINAL TRESPASS WARNINGS / PAWN TICKETS / NCIC ENTERIES
v All dispatchers are responsible to enter the following items into the SLEUTH system, when the property custodian
is not available to do so:
o Citations (traffic & non-traffic/criminal): Upon entry, citations are to be grouped by officer issuing, and then
place in the J&S box in dispatch. (NOTE: Entry of citations are currently handled primarily by the Evidence
Custodian, however it is expected that Communications be capable of handling the duty when needed.)
o

Criminal Trespass Warnings: Upon entry, CT warnings are to be filed alphabetically by offender name
and into the Criminal Trespass Warnings binder in dispatch. . (NOTE: Entry of criminal trespass warnings
are currently handled primarily by the Evidence Custodian. Filing is still maintained in dispatch.)

o

Pawn Tickets: All items with serial numbers will be checked for 10-29 in NCIC via article or gun query.
Once complete, pawn tickets with no 10-29 will be placed in CID’s box. Those with 10-29s will be turned
over to CID with the 10-29 item highlighted on the ticket, and the hit attached. Pawn tickets are divided
equally among each shift for processing.

NCIC (National Crime Information Center)

v Communications is responsible for the timely entry of stolen/wanted articles, vehicles, license plates, guns and
missing persons into the NCIC system. Failure to enter in a timely manner can jeopardize the safety of emergency
responders, or the public. Upon completion of entries, each entry will be promptly second-party checked for
accuracy, and then filed in the grey filing cabinet according to the type and month of entry.
v Communications also enters wanted persons into the NCIC system. (Felony warrant entries are the exception.
Felony warrants are generally forwarded to the Lincoln Co. Sheriff’s Office Communications Division for entry, and
the hard copies are held there.) Upon completion of wanted persons/warrants entries, each entry will be promptly
second party checked for accuracy, and then filed in the black filing cabinet, alphabetically by wanted person last
name.

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL
MAINTENANCE OF WORK SPACE AND CLEANING ASSIGNMENTS

v All dispatchers are responsible for maintaining a clean and organized console. This is important because there
are times when other dispatchers must sit at your console and take over an emergency situation. Failure to
maintain a clean and organized workspace can hamper another dispatcher’s ability to adequately perform.
v In addition to the maintenance of personal workspace, Communications Officers are responsible to maintain the
cleaning schedule for the dispatch center. The regular janitorial contract DOES NOT include the dispatch center,
therefore the responsibility for regular cleaning and collection of garbage rests with the dispatchers.
v Each shift is scheduled on a rotating basis to handle the cleaning responsibilities.
o The responsible shift is determined on a rotating schedule and is indicated at the bottom of the large
whiteboard calendar in dispatch.
o Duties required by the responsible shift are as follows:
§ Sweep all floors daily.
§ Mop/vacuum all floors a minimum of once weekly.
§ Empty all waste bins daily.
§ Re-stock all supplies (coffee/filters/silverware, paper towels, office supplies, etc.) at least once a
week, and more often if needed.

CALL-TAKING

Telecommunications General Orders
A. Purpose:
To establish guidelines for telecommunications in dispatching calls for service, while not every incident
or situation is listed, these general orders will provide a framework to assist the telecommunications
in handling everyday responsibilities.

B. Policy:
Most often the initial contact the public has with the department is throughout telecommunications
center. It is vital that telecommunications are provided with guidelines to perform their responsibilities
efficiently, courteously, and with consistency. It is recognized that the telecommunicator often does
not have time to review departmental policy while taking a call. However, they should be aware that
knowledge of departmental policy is an essential element of their occupation, and where conflict
between these general order and departmental policy occurs, departmental policy should be followed.

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL
TELEPHONE AND FACSIMILE SYSTEMS

TELEPHONES
v The administrative telephone used in dispatch operates with multiple incoming lines.
o Lines are routed through dispatch.
o Answer as follows: “Ruidoso Police Department, this is [name]. How may I help you?”
o In order to dial out on one of these lines, you must first press 9, and then dial the number. If the number
is long-distance, after dialing the number, you will hear a long tone. Enter your long distance code at that
time.
v Crime stoppers
o This is the only line that is not recorded, and is to be used for Crime stoppers tips ONLY.
o Answer as follows: “Lincoln Co. Crime stoppers” or “Ruidoso Crime stoppers.”
§ If the caller on the Crime stoppers line wishes to give a tip:
• Open the Crime stoppers binder and obtain a CS number. Give this number to the caller
and have them reference it when calling to check on status of the tip.
• Fill out the tip sheet accordingly, and place it in CID’s box and/or refer to the appropriate
agency if necessary.
o Dialing out on this line requires you to first press 9.
FACSIMILES:
v There are two faxes hooked up for departmental use. One is located in the communications center, and the other
is located at the front desk.
o Front Desk fax number is: 575-258-1145
o Dispatch fax number is : 575-258-1863
v Dialing out on the fax does not require pressing any key or code for an outside line first. Simply dial the number
and press SEND. If the number you are dialing is long distance, enter the phone number, including 1 and the area
code, then press the PAUSE button and enter your long distance code. Complete the long distance fax by pressing
SEND.
CALL-TAKING:
v The average citizen only has contact with law enforcement three times in their life.
v On average, two out of every five calls will be a call for service.
v Never assume that just because a call is coming in on an administrative line, that it will not be an emergency.
v Always be alert and prepared with your note-taking implements and your equipment ready.
v You must control the call. Do not be rude, but do maintain your authority as the controller of the call.
v Avoid long pauses or interruptions in the call flow if possible. Doing so may cause you to lose your control of the
situation.
v Each type of call presents a different set of questions and answers that need to be asked and obtained. As
questioning proceeds, you should be able to determine the priority response for the call, and how to proceed.
Utilize your reference sheets and familiarize yourself with each type of call you might receive and how respond
and prioritize the call.

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL
E911 OPERATIONS

OPERATION OF THE E911 SYSTEM
v PSAP is an acronym for Public Safety Answering Point. A PSAP is the call center that is designated to handle 911
calls for a specific geographical area. Within Lincoln County, there are two PSAPs: RPD, AND Lincoln Co. S.O.
o RUIDOSO PD: generally handles incoming 911 calls for Ruidoso, Ruidoso Downs and the parts of Lincoln Co.
that surround Ruidoso proper.
o LINCOLN CO. S.O.: generally handles incoming 911 calls for outlying areas of Lincoln Co. not covered by the
Ruidoso PSAP, including but not limited to Carrizozo, Capitan, Bonita, Corona and Alto.
o Although a PSAP may handle a primary area, the dispatcher should be prepared to handle incoming 911 calls
from all over the state, not just the area that their assigned PSAP normally covers.
ANSWERING 911
v When receiving an incoming 911 call, dispatch will be notified by a distinctive ring, and the flashing red/green indicator
on the Positron E911 screen. (NOTE: To utilize the 911/GIS keyboard, press CTRL, release, and the press 1. To
revert to the CAD keyboard, press CTRL and then 2.)
v In order to answer in incoming call, the dispatcher must do the following:
o Click on the button showing an active incoming call using the mouse.
v When answering the incoming 911 call, the State of New Mexico mandates that the 911 operator will identify which
PSAP has received the call. This is done by answering EVERY 911 call in the following manner: “Ruidoso Area 911,
what (or where) is your emergency?” (Remember that all 911 lines are recorded.)
v Occasionally, there are multiple incoming 911 calls. When this occurs, it is necessary to determine which trunk the
active call is coming in on in order to answer it. In order to determine the incoming trunk, you must right click on the
incoming call button that is showing active. This will pull up a separate box on the upper right hand side of the positron
E911 screen. That screen will show an active button for the incoming trunk. Each truck is labeled: 911-1, 911-2, 9113. Answering by truck line once the trunk has been determined is the same as answering when a single call is inbound.
v Once you have picked up the incoming 911 call, you should receive ANI (Automatic Number Indicator) and ALI
(Automatic Location Indicator) information. The ANI/ALI screen is displayed directly above the incoming call indicator
buttons. Cell phone callers will not display ANI/ALI information all of the time, but landline callers generally will.
Regardless of whether or not the call displays ANI/ALI information, always make sure to verify the caller’s location,
location of the emergency, and the number the caller is calling you from.
v Upon receiving a 911 call from a wireless phone, wait approximately 15-20 seconds into the call and hit the RTX button
on the ALI section of the 911 screen (upper right hand side). This will triangulate the location of the 911 caller, based
on 911 cell towers that the call is bouncing off of. It makes it easier to narrow down the approximate location of the
caller. You may have to do this more than once.
v If you find that the caller has hung up prior to your pick-up of the call, or if the caller hangs up immediately after you
pickup (or during the course of the call), you are REQUIRED to attempt a call-back if possible. Call back should be
immediate, and you should attempt to call back as many times as required in order to establish voice contact. If you
are only able to reach voicemail or an answering machine, leave a message identifying yourself, and requesting that
they attempt to re-contact you in order for you to determine that they are in no need of assistance. Continue to attempt
to periodically re-contact the caller for at least 30 minutes after the initial hang up, or until you establish voice contact.
v Should you desire to listen in on another call-taker’s ongoing 911 call, you may do so by right-clicking on the active
911 call button (lower left-hand side of Positron screen) and then double-clicking on the appropriate trunk line in the
resulting pop-up window. Note: once you have joined in on the 911 call, your handset is LIVE. You should always opt
to mute your handset when you are not the primary call-taker. (Click the mute button below the 911 incoming line
indicator buttons, or hold down the mute button on the handset.)

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

E911 OPERATIONS (CONT.’D)

ANSWERING 911 (CONT’D.)
v Once you have handled a call, or have finished listening to a call that another operator is handling, you must select the
orange “R” button on your Positron screen to disconnect. You may also hit release on your 10-key pad. If you do not
disconnect the call, you will continue to have an open, live, 911 line.
TTY/TDD CALLS
v There are times when an incoming 911 call will have dead air on the other end. This may be a misdial, or it may be a
TDD (Telecommunications Device for the Deaf) call. TDD is a tool utilized by people with speech or hearing disabilities
that enables them to communicate via telephone.
v To recognize an incoming 911 call as TDD, you must listen for a tone. There are some TDD systems that have a
recording announcing that the call is a TDD/TTY call. IF you do not hear a tone or a recording, but are unable to reach
anyone by repeating yourself, you should send out a TDD test tone. This will enable the E911 system to connect of
the caller on the other end is using TDD.
v

To send a TDD tone, follow these steps:
o Left-click on the TTY button located in the upper right-hand corner of the ANI/ALI indicator section.
o When the TTY box pops up, look for the Baudot button on the bottom left-hand side. Left-click. Once you’ve
done this, the text box above should automatically show incoming text if the call is a TDD call. If clicking on
the Baudot button is unsuccessful, repeat the steps, using instead the ASCII button. (Be prepared for a very
loud tone in your ear when using the ASCII button. You may want to hold the phone receiver away from your
ear until the tone is complete.)
o If you are successful at connecting with a TDD caller, you may communicate via the messaging box in your
TDD screen. (See reference sheets for proper TDD protocol.)

TRANSFERRING CALLS
v Because Ruidoso PD is a PSAP for several jurisdictions, you will find that there are times when a transfer to another
agency is required. There are two ways to transfer a call to another agency.
v For agencies that are routinely transferred 911 calls (LCSO, BIA, RDPD), you may left-click on the button labeled with
the appropriate agency name. These buttons are located at the bottom right-hand corner of the Positron screen.
v For agencies that are not listed on the quick-button transfer, right-click on the agency transfer button on the top row of
the transfer buttons. (The button will have “right click to view” listed on it.) This will bring up a separate menu that you
may select from in order to transfer to the appropriate agency by left-clicking.
I.T.R.R. AND ROLODEX FEATURES
v Positron has enabled the dispatcher to access recording for recent radio and 911 traffic by utilizing the I.T.R.R. (Internal
Telephone and Radio Recorder). You access this feature by selecting the ITRR button on the top left hand side of
your Positron screen. Once the ITRR has popped up, you may select either telephone or radio recordings to listen to,
or if you so desire, you may listen to telephone and radio recordings simultaneously. You also have the option to save
the recordings on your terminal for quick access later.
v Positron is also equipped with a rolodex feature, enabling the dispatcher to access numbers, addresses and additional
information for multiple resources. You may select the rolodex by left-clicking the rolodex icon on the upper left-hand
side of your Positron screen. You may search for information in a number of ways, including card name, type of
contact, etc.

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL
E911 OPERATIONS (CONT.’D)

OPERATION OF THE GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM (GIS) MAP
The GIS map is integrated with E911. Whenever a 911 call comes in on a land line and is associated with a verified
address, the GIS will plot the location the call came from on the map. In the case of some 911 cell callers, the address
plotted on the map will refer to the cellular tower that the cell call was placed from. The plotted location will remain on the
map for a minimum of one minute after the disconnection of the call. DO NOT RELY SOLELY ON THE LOCATION
PLOTTED ON THE MAP TO OBTAIN YOUR DISPATCH ADDRESS. IT IS NOT ALWAYS CORRECT OR RELIABLE.
The GIS map is to be used only as a tool in addition to, not in place of, verifying the address with your caller.
v It is also possible to enter addresses to be plotted on the map. In order to find an address on the map, you must select
the “SEARCH” tab on the left-hand side of the screen, next to the map.
o

Under the SEARCH tab, click on the LOCATION field. Type in your address with minimal information. (For
example, use “332 Sudderth” not “332 Sudderth Drive, Ruidoso.”) The address should turn bold if it is verified,
and then automatically plot on the map after you press the ENTER key.
§ To plot intersections, use the following format: Sudderth/Mechem

o

There is a COORDINATES tab under the LOCATION tab. If you left-click on the COORDINATES tab, the
address that you plotted on the map will show GPS latitude and longitude coordinates, which is particularly
helpful for people lost that have only GPS coordinates to provide.
§ Under the COORDINATES tab, you also have the option to enter latitude and longitude in order to plot
a location.
§ This feature will be used more by the Sheriff’s Office and State Police; however, you should make an
effort to familiarize yourself with the function should they request your assistance, or should you
receive the 911 call for help that has only latitude and longitude for a location.

o

Under the SEARCH tab, there is also a field to enter “NEW PIN DESCRIPTION.” This is used to title or mark
specific pinpoints on the map. For example, if you have an officer stationed on a perimeter, or hydrant location
that your need to mark, you may select the NEW PIN DESCRIPTION field and enter the officer’s badge
number, or a name for the hydrant, then enter the address or intersection in the LOCATION field, and then hit
the ENTER key. GIS will then plot the location on the map, titling it with the name you have chosen.
§ You may plot as many pins as necessary
§ Once you’ve finished with the pins you’ve set, you can clear them by selecting the “CLEAR PINS” icon
in the top center of the GIS screen, right under the blue title bar.

v It can also helpful to plot the address on the ArGIS map provided by the Village GIS Coordinator. This map clearly
defines the boundaries for the Village of Ruidoso. You can access the map by going to the following web address:
https://www.ruidoso-nm.gov/planning-zoning-1 and selecting the “VIEW LARGE ONLINE ZONING MAP” option.

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL
EMERGENCY MEDICAL DISPATCH (EMD)

A NOTE REGARDING EMD: As PSAP 911 operators, we are the FIRST first-responder on the scene of a medical
emergency. When callers contact 911 in the event of any emergency, we are the first line of help and defense they have
for resolving the situation. Often times, it is our ability to adequately perform our duties that means the life or death of the
person needing emergency assistance.
As a result, we are required to be certified to give medical instruction and direction to callers. Doing so begins medical
treatment for the patient in need, and often, may save the person’s life. Doing it properly also protects us from liability if a
patient’s condition worsens and they suffer severe injury, disfigurement or death.
With the responsibility of providing Emergency Medical Dispatch, you, as the 911 operator, are also charged with the
burden of liability. Therefore, once you begin giving emergency assistance, you are required to follow through with the
patient, giving instruction and direction, as well as maintaining communication via 911 line until a scene responder arrives
(paramedic or EMT). Failure to do so could mean that not only is the PSAP liable if the person dies or is incapacitated, but
you are also personally held responsible.
MAKE SURE THAT YOUR USE OF EMD IS RESPONSIBLE, THOROUGH, AND TO THE LETTER OF STANDARD
OPERATING PROCEDURE.
Until you are sent to the proper EMD course and receive your certification, you are not to provide emergency medical
dispatch unless it is at the direction and under the direct supervision of a certified EMD provider.
v At each dispatch console, there is a black hard-back binder that, when opened, contains a MEGAcall EMD flipchart.
This flipchart contains pre-arrival medical instructions that can be provided to the caller in the case of a medical
emergency.
v When a 911 call is received and it is determined that it is a medical emergency, the 911 operator should immediately
pull out the EMD flipchart and begin giving pre-arrival instructions to the caller.
v Using the MEGAcall flipchart:
o Begin on the right-hand, top side with the Dispatch Flow Chart. Ask each question, in order, and as verbatim
as possible.
o

Once the answers have been obtained to the initiation card, provide that information to emergency medical
responders and then select the appropriate card in the flip chart for the patient’s chief complaint/symptomology.

o

Each card should be read verbatim, beginning with the KEY QUESTIONS section, making sure to update the
responders with the answers given to the questions asked of the caller.

o

Once all of the medical questions have been asked and answered, begin giving the PRE-AMBULANCE
INSTRUCTIONS listed below the key questions.

o

Below the PRE-AMBULANCE INSTRUCTIONS there is a section with additional information that might be of
help to the dispatcher.

v With every medical call, it is important to remain on the line with the caller, even after pre-arrival instructions have been
given, until the scene responders arrive at the location. This prevents too long a delay in relying updated patient
information in the event that the patient’s condition changes or worsens, or in the case of the patient’s death.
v It is also helpful to make sure to determine if there are any pets that are at the residence, or inside the residence. If
so, ask that the caller secure them if at all possible before scene responders arrive. Waiting until the paramedics arrive
to determine that there is a yard full of vicious dogs doesn’t help the patient, and it puts the responders in danger.

It is recommended that you also familiarize yourself with call-taking techniques regarding hysterical
callers, as medical calls very often are initiated by callers that are hysterical or in a state of panic and
shock.

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL
THINGS TO REMEMBER

VOICE: Keep in mind that this is the caller’s first impression of you. First impressions are very important and
can make someone feel comfortable or very uncomfortable. Keep this in mind while you are talking to them.
PITCH: High or low – Speech experts say a low-pitched voice is more desirable because it projects and carries
better. It is also more pleasing to the ear and generally has a calming effect.
INFLECTION: Don’t talk in monotone. Use feeling to express an idea or mood. Rising inflection toward the
end of a sentence is very helpful.
COURTESY: Common, everyday courtesy should be used in the same way you would face to face. It may be
more important because you cannot see the person to whom you are speaking, and thusly, they are unable to
read your body language. It’s better to be overly courteous than not courteous enough.
TONE: Many times, it isn’t what you say, but how you say it. Your voice should reflect sincerity, pleasantness,
confidence and interest.
UNDERSTANDIBILITY: Avoid talking with anything in your mouth. Also make sure to speak directly into the
phone or radio.
RATE: The basic rate of speech is 120 WPM. If you speak too rapidly, people start listening to your rate of
speech instead of to what you are saying. If you speak too slowly, it can be irritating to a listener because he is
kept hanging on every word and tends to anticipate what you are going to say. Speaking too slowly may also
give the impression that you are not concerned with their problem.
ENUNCIATION: The English language is full of similarities – T & D, P & B, E & V. Clear enunciation will help
avoid misunderstanding and reduce the need to repeat yourself.
TELEPHONE GREETING: Because all calls are potential emergencies, you must promptly answer all incoming
calls. If you are not able to immediately handle the call because of incoming 911 calls, radio traffic, etc., ask
the caller, “Do you have an emergency?” If their response is negative, then you may tell them to “hold, please.”
If the caller’s response is affirmative, then handle the call and prioritize accordingly.
VOICE QUALITY: You should speak slowly and clearly on the telephone and with adequate volume. If callers
cannot hear or understand you, you will have to repeat questions and instructions, which wastes time. Your
voice should project authority and knowledge, backed up by a certainty of what you are telling the caller. If you
are hesitant or seem unsure, the caller will probably question your answers or ability to help. If the caller has a
question you don’t know the answer to, tell them that you don’t readily know the answer, but that you will find
out for them if they don’t mind waiting for a few moments.
ETIQUETTE: When dealing with all callers, you are required to maintain a polite and friendly tone. If the caller
has a legitimate request of the Police Department, dispatch an officer and do not become involved in an
argument. If the caller clearly does not have a problem, but persists in talking, refer them to the proper agency
and then tell them that you have other calls to answer. If you determine that you cannot provide a service to a
caller, explain to them why you can’t and refer them to someone who can, if possible.
CONTROL OF THE CONVERSATION: It is important that you maintain control of all telephone conversations
so that you can obtain all the necessary information in the least amount of time. Talkative or insistent callers
are difficult to question and may take a longer time, and more patience, on the part of the call-taker.

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL
TYPES OF CALLERS

ANGRY/HOSTILE CALLER
Treat all callers with respect and courtesy. Understand that certain people react with anger and hostility when
frustrated, frightened or upset. You have a responsibility to help all callers, not just the polite ones. You are
responsible for controlling the call. You can do this by speaking quietly. If you speak quietly and don’t react
negatively to their anger and hostility, your manner and the tone of your voice will usually calm the caller. Don’t
take a hostile caller personally. Try to understand their point of view and be empathetic.
HYSTERICAL CALLER
Explain that you need them to calm down so you can get the information you need to help them. Suggest that
they try taking deep, regular breaths. Use repetitive persistence. Repeat your questions with the exact same
wording and tone until you get an answer. If the caller lapses into hysteria, use the same techniques to calm
them down again.
INTOXICATED CALLER
Be patient and courteous. Get as much information as you can. Intoxicated callers are often unreasonable.
Be patient and calm.
MENTALLY UNSTABLE CALLER
Be patient and courteous. Determine the exact nature of the problem. Chronic callers should be treated the
same as others. Realize that chronic callers can have legitimate emergencies too. Never “play” with a person
with mental health problems.
VERY YOUNG CALLER
Try to use words appropriate for their age level. If they don’t know their address, ask for their name and for
landmarks. Ask if they know the ABCs and 123s. Can they look at mail and read the address? Can they look
at numbers on the front of the house? Ask for parents’, grandparents’ or teachers’ names. Ask if there is a
neighbor nearby that can talk with you. Ask where their parents work, where they go to school, or what their
babysitter’s name is. Children usually have much of the needed information. You need to be very persistent
and imaginative in finding different ways to get the information you need.
VERY OLD CALLER
Be patient, courteous and respectful. If caller seems to have difficulty hearing you, speak more slowly and
enunciate very carefully.
SPEECH IMPAIRED CALLER
Be patient and calm. Try to calm the caller. Stress and excitement can sometimes worsen impaired speech.
If you are short or seem to be rushing the caller, you could be causing them more stress.
INDECISIVE CALLER
This type of caller is apprehensive and slow to speak. They are sometimes hesitant to give information and will
pause a lot. Reassure the caller that they have done the right thing by calling and that they will receive help.
Clarify information that they have given so that they know you have understood. After clarifying the information
given, explain what you are going to do.
CALLER IN SHOCK
These callers may be very calm and will not have much emotion at all. Be sure to pay very close attention to
everything that is said. This may allow you some insight and make you aware that the person is in shock. This
is important, as a person who is going into (or has gone into) shock may become a separate medical emergency.

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL
QUESTIONING AND LISTENING TECHNIQUES

CONVERSATIONAL STYLE
Watch your tone and volume. Watch your pace in regard to the type of caller you have on the line. Be very
considerate of the emotional state of the victim. Remember that the first two words of the conversation are
usually lost. Watch for the numbers game, i.e. hysterical callers transposing numbers. Remember that the
complainant gives the location and the operator verifies. Take notes as you are handling the call.
PUTTING THE CALLER ON HOLD
Let the caller know you are putting them on hold. Return promptly and always thank them for calling. Let them
know that responders will be sent if applicable.
BONDING
Get the caller’s name and use it. Treat them like a person, not just the next call in line.
RELUCTANT CALLERS
Reassure them that you will help them if you can. If you can’t help them, refer them to someone that is able to
do so. Request information, don’t demand it. Don’t lie to the caller.
UNDERSTANDING THE COMPLAINANT
Be careful not to minimize the information given to you. Don’t try to explain it away. Listen to the caller and be
aware of his/her emotions, hopes, fears, perceptions, values, age level, etc. It is not necessary to agree or
accept the caller’s perception or point of view; however, an effort should be made to understand it. It is helpful
to articulate to the speaker exactly what you understand to be the problem.
ASSUMPTIONS
Don’t assume every situation is the same. Treat every complainant fairly and individually. Don’t try and deceive
the caller.
ANGRY CALLER
Remember that all anger originates with the caller. Anger is a choice and secondary reaction. Try not to make
things worse by participating in their anger.
HOW TO HANDLE OVERLY ABUSIVE PEOPLE
Cue yourself to sit or stand still. Assume an open posture if dealing with a complainant in person. Try to
depersonalize the situation by remembering that their anger is at the situation, not you, and you cannot control
the thoughts and emotions of the caller. Listen to the complete explosion. Ignore name calling and profanity
and don’t interrupt. Remember that there may be more attacks. Tell them you will help if you can. Use the
echo method – repeat things back to the caller to verify that you got them correct. Don’t rush them.
Transfer/refer caller to a supervisor if it cannot be controlled.

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL
THINGS TO THINK ABOUT

The average citizen only has contact with law enforcement 3 times in their life.
It’s important to always be ready and alert with your equipment and note taking implements at hand. An average
of 2 out of 5 phone calls received by dispatch are calls for service.
Be aware of your voice inflection and tone, and remain calm. This will help the caller remain calm as well.
Be aware of your own bias, prejudices and past experiences that may interfere with your judgment. Keep an open
mind and be willing to change your opinions and options.
Avoid assuming anything about another person’s problem. Listen to what they have to say.
Stay positive and focused.
Remember to repeat what the caller has said so that they know that you are listening.
Always maintain a business-like attitude, even if the situation seems humorous or funny. You should sound
empathetic and never make light of a caller’s situation. Don’t make jokes or relate stories to illustrate a point. The
caller may not get the punch line. Don’t try and be funny.
Never try to educate a caller in terminology or the law. You may just make the caller feel dumb or start an argument.
For example, if a caller says that they’ve been “robbed,” don’t explain that it’s really a burglary.
The most effective tactic is to ask short, specific questions; such as name, address telephone number, location
etc. The questions should obtain relevant information and should maintain a good flow, free of interruptions. If
you pause too long in questioning, or become sidetracked or distracted, your control of the conversation will end
and you’ll have to re-establish it.
Remain calm under pressure. Prioritize and make immediate decisions. Use clear speech and good listening
skills. Hesitation on your part may make the caller feel as if you are incompetent. Refrain from the use of stall
tactics in speech such as “um” or “hmm.”
Listen to what the caller is saying, but also listen for background noise that may help clue you in as to location or
situation. For example, listen for anyone yelling in the background, dogs barking, person choking or gasping, or
location specific noises such as slot machines or construction noise.
Never walk away in the middle of a call, regardless of situation. Just because your shift’s end has arrived and
does not give you the right to walk away from the console without following through on your responsibilities. Doing
so means you’ve just abandoned your post and it makes you, as well as the Department, liable for anything that
may happen as a result. You could be personally sued and/or lose your job as a result.
Think before acting or speaking. Foresee possible problems and plan solutions.
Ask for details. Remember that if a caller says the suspect left “in a red car,” asking them for details may mean
obtaining more information that helps to catch the suspect. Ask them if it was a dark red car, or bright red. Ask
them if it was small or large. Ask if it had two doors or four, and if the vehicle was a hatchback or had any other
distinguishing features. People generally remember if prompted.
Make an accurate assessment of possible risks to field units. Be complete in your questioning and, in the case of
medical calls or in-progress calls, keep the caller on line if safe to do so. Relay information obtained to your
responders in a timely manner. After the officer arrives and advises “shots fired” is NOT the time to remember that
there might be weapons present. Check persons involved for history and warrants if you can. OFFICER SAFETY
COMES FIRST!!!
Treat every caller’s problem if it was your own, and there will be NO PROBLEM.

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

MEDIA SYSTEM
Use the MEDIA SYSTEM: Who, What, When, Where, Why, Weapons, How
WHO
v Who is the calling party?
v Who is involved in the situation?
v Physical descriptions:
Ø Name (if known)
Ø Gender
Ø Race
Ø Height/Weight
Ø Hair (Color, style, length, etc.)
Ø Eyes (Color, glasses worn, other distinguishing features)
Ø Facial description (acne, facial hair, scars, shape of face, etc.)
Ø Clothing (Think top to bottom: hat, shirt, jacket, pants/skirt/shorts, socks/shoes)
Ø Accessories (belts, jewelry, watch, etc.)
Ø Scars/Marks/Tattoos
Ø Special descriptors (Any special method of speaking? Accent? Distinctive walk? Appear intoxicated? Etc.)
WHAT
v What is going on?
v What do you need? (Police, Fire, EMS)
v What happened?
v What is the problem?
v What is the caller’s name?
v What kind of vehicles are involved?
WHEN
v When did this happen? Is it happening now?
v When did suspect leave?
v When did you first notice the problem/situation?
WHERE
v Where did this happen (address/phone)? (Location address)
v Where are you (address/phone)? (Caller address)
v Where do responders need to report to (Address/phone)? (Report address)
v Where is the suspect/offender?
v Where is the victim?
WHY
v Why is the problem occurring?
v Why are you upset, what is wrong?
WEAPONS
v Where are the weapons?
v What kind of weapon (gun, knife, bat, mace, etc.)?
v (If applicable) Is the weapon loaded/armed?
HOW
v
v
v
v

How did you find out about this? (If caller involved, find out how.)
How many people are involved?
How long has it been since situation occurred?
How long, if applicable, has subject/item/vehicle been missing?

Write down everything significant that the caller is saying – do not rely on your memory. If necessary, tell the
caller to slow down. A caller reporting a crime in progress should be kept on line as long as safely possible, or
until responders arrive. During this time, additional information can be obtained and passed on to the responders.

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

CALL PRIORITIZATION
Calls for service should be prioritized for response based on the likelihood of loss of life, limb, or property. Call prioritization
falls under four (4) categories: Emergency, Priority 1, Priority 2, and Priority 3.
EMERGENCY CALLS: Require immediate dispatch

•
•
•

There is an immediate threat of violence or loss of life.
Crime or incident is in progress.
Examples of Emergency Calls can include: Active shooter, CSP in progress, Kidnapping, Homicide, Violent
Domestics, Shooting/Stabbing, Aggravated Battery, Robbery, Structure Fire, Man Down (no breathing/CPR in
progress), etc.

PRIORITY 1 CALLS: Require dispatch within 2 minutes

•
•
•

There is an immediate threat to property, or high chance of apprehension of suspect or prevention of
violence.
Crime or incident is in progress, or just occurred
Examples of Priority 1 Calls can include: Verbal Domestics, Burglary in Progress (unless resident is inside the
home during commission of burglary, then it would be an emergency call), DWI, Hold-up/Panic/Medical
alarms, Trouble to Ensue, Fights, Traffic Crash with injury, etc.

PRIORITY 2 CALLS: Require dispatch within 10 minutes
• There is no immediate threat to life or property, but response needs to be faster than a report call.
• Crime or incident is not in progress, or has not just occurred, but there is a chance delay in response might
result in an escalation or commission of a crime.
• Examples of Priority 2 Calls can include: General burglary alarm calls, Welfare checks, loose dog and most
animal calls, non-injury traffic crash, Traffic obstruction or direction, Suspicious persons/vehicles/activity,
Civil standby, etc.
PRIORITY 3 CALLS: Should be dispatched as soon as all other priority calls have been handled.
• There is no immediate threat to life or property, and holding to call for an available unit will not negatively
impact the outcome.
• Crime or incident is not in progress, or has not just occurred, and there is little to no likelihood that it could
escalate or result in commission of a crime.
• Examples of Priority 3 Calls can include: All delayed report calls, Close Patrols, Parking Violations (unless
there’s an altercation over the parking violation, or it is obstructing traffic), meet complainant calls, etc.

Note: If you are unable to dispatch a unit within the allotted time, then you should broadcast that you
have a call pending, indicating the type/nature of call, within that time frame.

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

CRIME STOPPERS TIP LINE
Communications is responsible for handling the Crime Stoppers Tip Line and for taking donations to Crime Stoppers as
assigned by the Courts and Probation/Parole Office.
HANDLING CRIME STOPPERS TIPS:
v All Crime Stoppers tips will be logged by the dispatcher. There is a Crime Stoppers Binder on the back shelves in
dispatch that should be pulled whenever a tipster calls in.
v The Crime Stoppers binder contains the following:
o Lincoln County Crime Stoppers Donation Form (found in the front pocket)
o Ruidoso Crime Stoppers Reference Numbers list (found in a plastic sleeve)
o Completed Crime Stoppers Questionnaire (found behind the Reference number sheet)
o Blank Crime Stoppers Questionnaire (found in the back pocket)
v Crime Stoppers Tips should be documented on a blank Crime Stoppers Questionnaire. Each questionnaire should
be assigned a “Caller ID Number” at the top of the sheet. This number is found on the Reference Numbers List at
the front of the binder. This number must be provided to the caller before the end of the call. In order for the caller
to collect any reward money, or to find out updates on the tip, they must reference this number.
o

REFERENCE NUMBER SHEET: Dispatch should log a brief description of the nature of the tip next to the
Reference Number, and should document the date/time the tip was received, then initial under “call taker
initials”

o

CRIME STOPPERS QUESTIONNAIRE: Assign the Caller ID number obtained from the Reference
Number sheet to the top of the Questionnaire and then question the tipster according to the sections listed
on the sheet.
§ Once the questionnaire is complete, Dispatch should notate what was done with the tip in the
“Investigator Notified” space.
Ø

If the tip is pertinent to an ongoing case in another jurisdiction, or is a report of a crime in
which another agency or an RPD unit should respond to, then the dispatcher will indicate
who was contacted. A copy of the completed tip sheet will then be included in the binder
behind the other completed sheets, and the original will be placed in the Evidence
Custodian’s box.

HANDLING CRIME STOPPERS DONATIONS
v Regularly, citizens are directed by the Courts, or by Probation/Parole to come make a donation to Crime
Stoppers as part of their restitution or sentence for minor infractions. Dispatch is responsible for taking the
donation and securing it to be turned over to Crime Stoppers.
o

Donations will be taken in the form of cash or money order only, and it must be exact. We do not provide
change.

o

The date and time of donation, the donator name and address, the court that referred the donator, as
well as the amount of the donation should all be recorded on the Donation Form. If the donator is making
the donation on someone else’s behalf, notate that information next to the “Donator Name” on the form.

Once the donation has been taken, and the Donation Form has been completed, have the donator sign the form, as well
as the dispatcher who took the donation. Once signatures have been made, provide a Xerox copy of the form to the donator
as a receipt, and place the original in a sealed envelope along with the funds donated. The sealed envelope will then be
marked “Crime Stoppers” and placed in the Evidence Custodian’s box.

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

CALL SPECIFIC QUESTIONING
ACCIDENTS
Response:
10-44: 1 PD unit unless vehicles are in the roadway, then send 2
10-45: 2 PD units, EMS/Fire
Hit and Run: 1 PD unit, unless in progress, then 2. EMS/Fire if needed.
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü

Is anyone hurt? If yes, get number and condition of victims.
Types of vehicles and how many involved?
Any vehicles still in roadway? If on a divided roadway, which lanes?
All involved parties still on scene?
Any fuel spilled or hazardous materials present? If yes, proceed to HAZMAT.

If hit and run:
ü What is the suspect vehicle description and direction of travel?
ü If delayed report, how long ago did complainant notice the damage? When is it believed that the damage occurred?
ü Is there a medical or emergency reason that the other party might not have stopped?
ü Do you know where suspect might be going?
If 10-45:
ü Tone out a combined page and administer EMD instructions (if you are certified) until responders reach the scene.
ü If it is a HAZMAT situation, notify responders of that fact and then notify the State Police (575-382-2500 ext. 1) to
handle.
ATTEMPT TO LOCATE
Response:
Broadcast via radio. No unit response required unless subject of the ATL is believed to be at a specific location in
jurisdiction.
ü Why are we looking for this person?
ü What is the person’s name and descriptors?
ü Any weapons? What kind?
ü Is subject suicidal or dangerous in any way?
ü What type of vehicle might they be in? Destination?
ü What was the last point of contact? When?
ATLs are generally used when trying to locate a person for whatever reason. Make sure to give out complete description
with all pertinent information about the subject, in a prompt manner. Indicate which agency is requesting the ATL.
AIRCRAFT DOWN
Response:
2 PD unit minimum. Notify the Shift Commander and Dispatch Supervisor.
EMS/Fire if injuries are suspected.
Notify FAA (800-255-1111)
ü When did this happen?
ü Do you know how many people were/are on board? Any fatalities?
ü Who else has been notified?
These calls can be very hectic. If you think you might need more help, notify the Shift Commander and/Dispatch Supervisor
and call in another dispatcher. Do whatever the Shift Commander requests of you, no matter how strange it may seem at
the time. SBRA has their own rescue response. Confirm that they have been notified and are responding before notifying
the Ruidoso Fire Department to respond as well.

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

CALL SPECIFIC QUESTIONING
ACTIVE SHOOTING RESPONSE
Response:
In progress: ALL AVAILABLE patrol units, Patrol Supv., Lt. and Chief.
Notify Dispatch Supervisor (Supervisor will notify extra comm. personnel)
EMS/Fire to stage (they will need to stage at IC location, away from scene)
NOTIFY SURROUNDING AGENCIES FOR POSSIBLE MUTUAL AID/STANDBY
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü

How long has this been in progress?
How many suspects?
Is/Are suspect(s) still on scene? Where is/are suspect(s) right now (where in building, etc.)?
What kind of weapons and how many?
Suspect description? Suspect vehicle description?
Has the shooter taken any hostages? If yes, how many and where?
Is anyone injured? If yes, how many and nature of injury?
Where are the injured parties?
If caller is on scene, is the caller in a safe area, or exposed to shooter?
Can caller get to a secure area safely? If not, are you able to shelter in place? Where are you sheltering in place?

Shooting calls can be very dangerous for all responders, and active shooters present a special set of challenges. It is
imperative that you keep abreast of what the agency response plan includes, as well as what the scene responders expect
of dispatch. (Active Shooter Response classes are frequently held as part of CE requirements.) Active shooter situations
are not a specialized response. Active shooters are a patrol dilemma. It will be regular duty patrol that will be
responding and handling the situation.
Early warning signs that a call may be an active shooter include;
• An onslaught of calls in a compact period of time
• Open line calls with muffled sounds
• Sounds of shots being fired without a caller speaking
• Seemingly unrelated explosion of fire calls that begin to form a pattern on a mapping system
• Fire alarms (latest strategy is to pull an alarm inside to drive victims outside to a waiting sniper)
Special considerations Communications Personnel need to take regarding response:
• Number of shooters and location updates
• Where to send/position responders for containment and safety
• Secondary issues such as snipers, bombs, hostage taking
• Escaping suspects
• Large groups of people moving in an out of the area and the anticipated effect thereof.
• Safety for responders at triage areas b/c of amount of emotional response within those areas
• Evacuations or sheltering in place plans and the special needs of each
• Traffic control
• Alarms
• Explosions and fires in conjunction with shooter activity
• THE MEDIA. The media will ALWAYS be an interference during call processing and response. You will likely
receive as many calls from the media as you do from the public and victims on scene. Quick establishment of a
PIO or media notification system is integral and should be a priority of your incident command. Current trend is for
PIO/IC to use social media to make quick and effective regular updates.
Questioning / Dispatching techniques and considerations:
• Active shooter incidents will be chaotic and panicked. It is imperative that you exercise repetitive persistence and
take command of the call. Establish control so that you can quickly obtain and relay information.
• Once a call is determined to be an active shooter situation, call for 10-3 traffic. Securing the channel for emergency
traffic related to the call only is imperative.

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

CALL SPECIFIC QUESTIONING
ACTIVE SHOOTING RESPONSE (cont.’d)
Questioning / Dispatching techniques and considerations:
• An active shooter incident should be dispatched like a lawn mower theft that should’ve been called in 2 weeks ago:
CALM, COLLECTED & with as LITTLE EMOTION as possible. (One key to remaining calm is to understand on
scene operations.)
•

Remember the formula: 5W + H + W + H + I (Where, What, Who, When, Why, How, Weapons, Hazards, Injuries)

•

Repeat radio transmissions. Repeat yours, and repeat theirs back to them. Active shooter events often have
multiple distractions (alarms, injured victims, etc.) and repeating transmissions helps both communications and
responder personnel focus, as well as repeats anything that they may have missed due to those distractions.

•

Keep abreast of any off-duty responders that may be responding after hearing the call out. Obtain descriptions and
information on those off-duty officers and relay it expeditiously to the on-duty responders enroute to the scene to
avoid off-duty responders being mistaken as suspects or additional victims.

•

While responders are enroute, DO update shooter information, location and description as it changes. Often,
active shooter incidents move incredibly fast, so accurate and timely updates on suspect and threat information is
vital. You do far more good by focusing attention on gathering and giving information because harm has already
been done to the victim.

•

Medical information and updates take a back seat until the shooter is neutralized. Dispatch should obtain number
of injured, casualties and injury type, but that information should be held until the shooter is down or in custody.

•

Once officers have made entry to the scene, having the control to remain silent on the radio is critical to officer
safety. Radio transmissions could give away the responder location to the shooter.

•

Status checks are made only according to operations protocol. If there is no specific preferred policy established
by IC, then every 10-15 minutes is a good general standard unless a team is clearing a building or area. In that
case, radio silence is priority.

•

Unless the caller tells you they are hiding and “sheltering in place,” try and obtain caller information. If they are
hiding and sheltering, and it is not safe to talk, then try to obtain clues about shooter information from background
noise. Dispatch should try to give callers the reason to stay away from arriving responders to avoid the risk of the
lifeguard effect (when citizens either grab onto or use as shields the police responders trying to locate the shooter).
Additionally, remind them to avoid clinging to the responder if the responder arrives to evacuate them. Simply
follow the direct orders of the responder and do not cling unless specifically instructed to by the responder to
remain close. If the caller makes the choice to run, or evacuate the premise to a safe place, update the responders
and again remind the caller to avoid grabbing responders or using them as shields, but instead to follow any
instructions given by police without hesitation.

•

Once the shooter is down or neutralized, dispatch can focus information giving to the casualties or the wounded.

•

Once the shooter is down or neutralized, holding the perimeter is critical and control at the staging and triage area
is vital to responder safety.

•

Work with your team in the communications center to sort out and coordinate information before giving it out on
the radio, both during the initial calls and response and during the aftermath/shooter neutralized phase.

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

CALL SPECIFIC QUESTIONING
ALARMS
Response:
2 PD unit minimum (if not fire or medical)
EMS/Fire (if fire or medical alarm)
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü

What type of alarm is sounding?
Is this a bank? If yes, move to BANK ALARM procedure.
Have you made contact at the location of the alarm? If yes, what response did you get?
Has key-holder been notified? If yes, who and what type of vehicle are they in?
What is the name of the alarm company calling in the signal? What is the callback number for them?
Was anyone seen in the area prior to the activation of the alarm?
If fire, do you know if parties are inside? Is there any flame or smoke?
If audio-monitored alarm, ask operator to indicate any sounds they hear, and find out if video access may be
available.

Our policy states we only respond to the following types of alarms:
§
§
§
§
§

Panic or Hold up alarms
Bank Alarms
Alarms at schools and medical facilities (including veterinary offices)
Medical (Lifeline) alarms
Fire alarms

We do not respond to general burglary alarms unless an alarm company representative (or key-holder) has arrived on
scene and specifically requests response. It is mandatory for the alarm company to notify a key-holder. Every alarm
company licensed to operate within the village has been notified of this policy via certified, return receipt letter.
ANIMAL IN DISTRESS
Response:
Animal Control Unit, (Send PD if traffic control is needed)
1 PD unit if ACO is off-duty
ü
ü
ü
ü

What type of animal is in distress?
What is the nature of the distress?
Where is the animal located (in the roadway, near a building, on private property, etc.)?
Is the animal showing signs of rabies or other disease?

If the animal is in distress after being struck by a vehicle, handled like a motor vehicle crash.
ARMED SUBJECT
Response:
2 PD unit minimum, notify Shift Commander (Dispatch Supervisor if it is determined an extra dispatcher may be
needed to handle extended call)
EMS/Fire to stage (if necessary)
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü

What type of weapon is present?
What is the suspect description and vehicle description, including direction of travel?
What exactly was seen/done?
Is anyone injured? If yes, what type of injury and what is the injured party’s condition?
Where is the caller in relation to the situation?
Does the caller know who the suspect is?
How is caller involved? (witness, victim, etc.)

Advise caller that once the officer reaches the area, he may check for suspect first, rather than immediately contact the
caller. If EMS/FD were requested, have them stage for their safety. Also provide them with suspect information in case
they make contact with the suspect while staged.

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

CALL SPECIFIC QUESTIONING
BANK ALARM
Response:
2 PD unit minimum and Shift Commander (Dispatch Supervisor will be notified if it is determined a robbery has
occurred or is in progress.)
The following is the procedure that will used to dispatch and handle ALL bank alarms. Personnel at all banking/financial
institutions in Ruidoso have been trained in these procedures.
1. Broadcast “921” and indicate location by address only. (DO NOT broadcast the name of the bank on the radio.
If an officer requests the name of the business, advise them to 10-21 for that information.) Call units for response,
assuring that at least one of the backup units is the shift commander.
2. Upon field units’ arrival at the location, they will indicate their position around the bank and then request dispatch
to “start procedures.” The channel will be called 10-3 and closed for 10-33 traffic only at that time.
PROCEDURES:
Ø The dispatcher will call the bank and ask for extension 900. Asking for ext. 900 will alert the answering party that
a silent alarm has been activated and that a designated bank official should be placed on the line. (Dispatch should
always remain on alert for an impersonation of a bank representative.) The bank official should then survey the
bank interior, without causing any unnecessary suspicion or alarm. (The line should be left open during this
process, NEVER disconnected.) After doing so, the bank official will then indicate the situation in the following
manner:
o Under duress (robbery occurring): Bank official will reply, “I’m sorry. He is not in. Could you call back?”
o Not under duress (no robbery): Bank official will need only to re-identify themselves and indicated the
probable reason for the alarm.
Ø Dispatch will update field units immediately as to the type of response, either positive (robbery) or negative (no
robbery). Extreme care must be taken to ensure that radio communications are not heard over the open phone
line.
Ø If a reported or suspected robbery is NOT in progress, the dispatcher will obtain a full physical description of the
bank official and then instruct him/her to exit a designated bank door to meet with field units for de-briefing. The
field units should be immediately notified of the description and which door at which to meet the bank official.
Ø Responders will remain concealed until the designated bank official appears outside the facility for debriefing.
Officer WILL NOT follow officials back into the building. Rifles and/or shotguns will be carried into the bank at the
discretion of the responders.
Ø IF A ROBBERY HAS OCCURRED: Field units will be immediately updated as to the situation and dispatch will
follow instructions of the field units accordingly. Chief and incident command staff should also be notified at this
time, as well as Dispatch Supervisor.

IN CASE YOU ARE NOTIFIED OF A ROBBERY PRIOR TO RESPONDERS ARRIVING:
If the bank telephones before responders arrive and advise that a robbery has taken place, and the suspects have fled,
the dispatcher should obtain a description of the suspects, their vehicle and the direction of travel. They should also obtain
information regarding type and number of weapons, and whether or not the weapons were actually displayed or if the
robbery suspects simply indicated that they were armed.
The bank employee should be kept on the line and as much additional information as possible should be obtained and
forwarded to responders promptly.
If a hostage situation is in existence, suspects should be allowed to exit and move away from the building. Officers are to
remain concealed and protect bystanders. SUSPECTS WILL NOT BE ALLOWED TO LEAVE THE LOCATION WITH
HOSTAGES.
*** NOTE:
The dissemination of information contained in this procedure is restricted to designated personnel of the Ruidoso Police Department.
Any unauthorized dissemination or disclosure may result in appropriate disciplinary and/or criminal court action.

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

CALL SPECIFIC QUESTIONING

BARKING DOGS
Response:
In Progress: Animal Control Unit (or PD unit if ACO is off-duty)
Delayed: Take the pertinent information and forward to ACO for follow-up next date.
ü
ü
ü
ü

What is the location of the barking dog?
Can you tell how many dogs are barking?
How long have they been barking?
Is this a habitual problem?

BATTERY (including BHHM)
Response:
In Progress: 2 PD unit minimum, notify Shift Commander, EMS/Fire to stage (if necessary)
Delayed: 1 PD unit for report
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü

When did this occur?
Is victim/caller injured? Condition and type of injury?
Is suspect still on scene, in area, or likely to return?
Was suspect armed? If yes, what weapons?
Does caller/victim know suspect?
What is suspect description, vehicle description (including direction of travel)?
Are there any restraining orders or protection orders on file regarding the suspect?

If an arrest is affected, and the battery is of a Domestic Violence nature, then a Domestic Violence Notification Sheet should
be completed by the arresting officer and returned to dispatch. The sheet will be maintained so that upon the offender’s
release from detention, Communications can make notification to the victim of the offender release. Notification is
required by the Victims of Crime Act (VOCA) of 1984.
It is the dispatcher’s responsibility to ensure that the DV notification sheet is completed by the arresting officer
and returned to dispatch.
BE ON THE LOOK OUT
Response:
Broadcast via radio. No unit response required unless subject of the BOLO is believed to be at a specific location
in jurisdiction.
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü

What is the nature of the call? (DWI, reckless driver, etc.)
Any special instructions? (If located hold for requesting agency? 10-48? 10-80? Check welfare only?)
Description of suspect?
Vehicle description, direction of travel?
Number of vehicle occupants?
Suspects armed? With what?
Possible destination?
Are subjects dangerous to themselves or anyone else?
Last point/time of contact?

BOLO is usually initiated when trying to locate a vehicle involved in some suspicious or illegal activity. When putting out a
BOLO, make sure to give all important details in a prompt manner. Include the name of the agency requesting the BOLO.
NEVER hold a BOLO or fail to put it out because you don’t believe it is pertinent.

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

CALL SPECIFIC QUESTIONING

BOMB THREAT
SEE ATTACHED BOMB RESPONSE POLICY
Response:
2 PD unit minimum, Shift Commander, Chief and Lieutenant (notified by Shift command), Dispatch Supervisor
EMS/FD to stage
NMSP bomb team (or Holloman AFB EOD team) to be put on alert. (This should be handled by IC.)
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü

Is there a time element?
Location of the bomb?
Are there people in the building/vicinity of the device? If necessary, notify surrounding businesses/residences.
Can the people safely evacuate?
Type of bomb?
Can it be set off remotely?
Is it likely that the bomb threat could turn into a hostage call?
Is the caller the subject who planted the bomb? If yes, try to determine motive.

The Shift Commander will be notified immediately upon receipt of the threat, as well as the dispatch supervisor. ALL
OTHER NOTIFICATIONS will be made at the discretion and order of the Shift Commander.

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

CALL SPECIFIC QUESTIONING
BOMB RESPONSE POLICY
It is the policy of the Ruidoso Police Department to respond to reports of actual or threatened use of
bombs, explosive devices, or abandoned or found explosives, in an attempt to reduce the risk to
persons and property to the greatest extent possible.
PROCEDURE:
A. In any incident where an explosive or suspected explosive device is located, responding officers will not handle,
or closely approach the device.
B. The officer should refrain from using communications equipment (including mobile telephone) within 100 YARDS
of the device or location where a bomb threat has been received. (Electromagnetic energy emitted by the radios
and cellular telephones may activate the device.)
C. Officers will assist with the evacuation of persons who are in the vicinity of the device. It is not possible to know
prior to the explosion how large an area must be evacuated. Thus, officers must rely on common sense judgment
in advising evacuated persons where to relocate.
D. Upon discovery of a device or suspected device:
1. The shift supervisor will respond to the incident location, if not already present.
2. The shift supervisor will make notification to the operations lieutenant.
E. Upon discovery of explosives, improvised explosive device, suspected device or evidence which might indicate
the presence of an explosive device; or after the explosion of the device, the New Mexico State Police EOD
(Bomb Unit) (575-382-2511) will be requested to assist or respond. In the event the NMSP EOD unit is
unavailable, one of the following will be requested to assist:
1. Holloman AFB EOD (Holloman AFB, NM)
PS: (575) 572-5406
2. US Army EOD (Ft. Bliss, TX)
PS: (915) 568-8905
F. Upon discovery and after response and investigation by the Ruidoso Police Department and/or alternate disposal
units, it shall be the decision of one or more of those personnel as to the disposition of the device or explosives.
G. If bomb personnel determine the threat of detonation of the device/explosives to be minimal, disarming and/or
removal of the device/explosives may be made to a safe area for destruction or dismantling.
H. If bomb personnel determine the threat of detonation of a device/explosives too great to disarm or remove, bomb
personnel, at their discretion, may allow the device to detonate on its own, or detonate it themselves after
appropriate evacuation of the area is completed.
I. At the conclusion of all incidents where bombs/explosive devices or hoax devices are discovered, the Federal
Bureau of Investigation (FBI) will be notified in writing by the Chief of Police on their appropriate forms.
TELEPHONIC BOMB THREATS:
A. Department personnel, usually telecommunications, should attempt to obtain all information available to complete
the “bomb threat checklist.” Call-takers and/or responding officers should obtain the following information:
1. The exact words of the person making the threat that will assist in identifying the person if they have
made previous calls. Many times, callers repeat words or phrases.
a. Call-takers, or reportees should also try and describe the voice of the caller, including speech
rate, impediments, style, slang or profanity used, accents, etc.
b. Did the caller sound familiar to the person receiving the call of the threat?
2. Where the device is reported to be located. This information may help in the location of the device or
in the planning of an evacuation.
3. When the device is reported to detonate.
4. What type of bomb (i.e. dynamite, pipe bomb, incendiary, etc.)
5. What the possible motive for the bomb/bomb threat may be
6. What type of background noise was heard, if any, during the course of the telephonic threat
7. Date and time of the call, as well as duration (length) of call.
8. If there’s a recording of the call available (if threat came in to someone other than dispatch directly)
B. The communications center will immediately notify the Ruidoso Fire Department to respond to stage during each
bomb/incendiary device call. (EMS may also be requested.)

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

CALL SPECIFIC QUESTIONING

CATS (LOOSE OR FERAL)
Response:
Animal Control Unit (or Police Unit if ACO is off-duty)
ü What is the nature of the cat complaint? Has the cat been dumped, abandoned or is it in distress or showing signs
of disease?
o If yes, ACO or PD will need to respond
o If no, transfer caller to the ACO office to be placed on a cat-trap list.
ü Are the cats feral or stray? If not, do you know to whom and where they belong?
ü How many cats? Are they adults or kittens?
ü Can you describe them? (Color, size, long-hair/short-hair, etc.)
CHILD ABUSE/NEGLECT
Response:
In progress, just occurred: 2 PD unit minimum, EMS/FD to stage, Victim Advocate.
Delayed report: 1 PD unit. EMS/FD if necessary.
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü

Is this in progress? How long has it been ongoing?
What EXACTLY is the nature of the abuse?
What is the relationship of the caller to the victim/suspect?
How did the caller find out about the abuse?
Where is the caller in relation to the incident (if in progress)?

If the abuse is CSP/CSC in nature, use discretion with information disseminated on the radio in order to protect the privacy
of the minor victim. Provide call details and information to the officer via telephone if necessary.
CIVIL STANDBY
Response:
2 PD unit minimum
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü

Location of standby?
Location of caller?
Is there a restraining order in effect? Do you have a copy of the restraining order?
Who is at the residence/business that we are going to?
Is the person home and/or do they know that we’re coming?
What is the history concerning reason for standby?
Have a neutral place for officer and complainant to meet before conducting the standby in order to obtain details.

Civil matters in which police become involved have a high potential to become explosive situations, in which the potential
for violence is high. Violence may have already occurred in the past. Some examples of explosive situations are domestic
violence incidents, strikes, landlord-tenant disputes, civil rights violations, boundary disputes, repossessions, and
mechanic’s liens. In most cases the only action that can be taken by police in civil situations is to ensure that no trouble or
fight ensues.
CODE ENFORCEMENT
Response:
1 Code Enforcement Officer
ü What is the location of the code enforcement violation?
ü What is the nature of the violation?
Most Code Enforcement calls are self-generated. Regardless of they are called in by a citizen or officer-generated, a call
card will be required.

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

CALL SPECIFIC QUESTIONING

CRIMINAL DAMAGE
Response:
In-progress: 2 PD unit minimum
Delayed report (no suspect on scene): 1 PD unit.
ü When did this occur? (If in progress, or just occurred, obtain suspect/vehicle descriptions)
ü Do you know who perpetrated the damage?
ü What type of damage occurred?
DOMESTIC/FAMILY DISTURBANCE
Response:
In-progress: 2 PD unit minimum, EMS/Fire to stage if there are reported injuries.
Delayed report (no suspect on scene): 1 PD unit. (If there is potential of the suspect returning, send a second
unit.)
Is this a verbal or physical altercation?
Any weapons involved? What kind?
Who is involved (husband/wife, parent/child, etc.)?
Has anyone been drinking or taking drugs?
Is anyone injured? Is there a need for an ambulance?
Are the parties involved inside or outside? Have they been separated?
How many people are in the house? If there are other members in the house, ask them to leave if they can do so
safely.
ü Are there children involved? If yes, how many and what are their ages?
ü Do the parties know that police are being called?
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü

Domestic violence is one of the most potentially dangerous calls to which any unit can respond. Make sure that
you are thorough in obtaining all possible information that may be pertinent and get the information to responders as soon
as possible. If the altercation is physical, have the caller stay on line if safe to do so. If the caller advises that they cannot
safely stay on the line to dispatch, ask if they can leave the line open and lay the phone down so that dispatch can hear
what is going on. If the caller is reluctant to answer in detail because the perpetrator is in the same room with them, ask
them simple questions that can be answered with a yes/no response.
***** If the call results in an arrest for domestic violence charges, make sure that the arresting officer completes a Domestic
Violence Notification Form and returns it to dispatch. We are required by law to make notification to the D/V victim upon
the offender’s release. This is per the Victims of Crime Act (VOCA) of 1984 . *****
DRUNKEN/IMPAIRED SUBJECT
Response:
2 PD unit minimum, EMS/Fire to stage if there are reported injuries, or if subject is passed out.
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü

Description of the subject?
Location?
How much have they had to drink (snort, inject, etc.) and of what?
Have they consumed any other substances?
(If passed out) Can the caller verify that the subject is breathing?
Is an ambulance needed?
Is the person in any danger?

Remember that some medical conditions cause people to appear to be intoxicated. This should be kept in mind, especially
if the caller is unable to smell the odor of an alcoholic beverage on the subject

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

CALL SPECIFIC QUESTIONING

EMBEZZLEMENT
Response:
1 PD unit minimum.
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü

What was taken?
How much?
When was it taken?
Is there a suspect?
Is the suspect present at this time? (If yes, dispatch 2 officers. If no, get description of suspect.)

FIGHT
Response:
2 PD unit minimum, EMS/Fire to stage if there are reported injuries.
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü

Is the fight currently in progress? (If not, find out where involved parties are.)
How many people involved?
Any weapons? Type and location?
What is the fight about?
Any injuries? Ambulance needed?
Are the involved parties intoxicated?

Find out the extent of the fight. If it’s ongoing and volatile, or if there are weapons or a large number of involved parties,
send as many officers as feasible until officers can gain control of the situation.
FIRE (BRUSH)
Response:
Notify 300 of extent of fire by initiating on-duty page. 300 will advise which fire units are responding.
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü

Any lives in danger?
Any structures in danger?
How large an area is involved?
Can you see smoke, flames or both? How large are the flames?
How did the fire start?

FIRE (FOREST)
Response:
Notify 300 of extent of fire by initiating on-duty page. 300 will advise which fire units are responding.
Contact the Forest Service in order for them to begin notification of their fire crews.
Notify the PD shift commander, as well as the Sheriff’s Office/State Police in case mutual aid is needed.
Notify the Dispatch Supervisor if the fire is large, or has the potential to result in requirement of extra comm.
personnel.
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü

Any lives in danger?
Any structures in danger?
How large an area is involved?
Can you see smoke, flames or both? How large are the flames?
How did the fire start?
Who else has been notified?
Find out if it may be necessary to evacuate citizens.
If smoke is close to caller, have them block passages of entry as best as possible.

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

CALL SPECIFIC QUESTIONING

FIRE (STRUCTURE)

NOTE: Fire calls will be dispatched according to specific protocol listed on the laminated page
Posted at each dispatch console. A copy of this sheet has been included on next page.

Response:
Notify 300 of extent of fire by initiating on-duty page. 300 will advise which fire units are responding.
2 PD unit minimum
EMS to stage
ü Is the caller or anyone else inside the structure? (If yes, stop interview and have them exit the building immediately)
ü Are flames visible from outside the structure?
ü What kind of structure is burning? (If commercial structure, try to determine type of structure and what may be
stored inside. Especially important if warehouse or storage facility is on fire.)
ü If you can see smoke, what color is it?
ü Where in the building did the fire start?
ü Is anyone injured? (If yes, and certified, give pre-arrivals)

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

CALL SPECIFIC QUESTIONING

FIRE DEPARTMENT RESPONSE PROTOCOL
(Copy posted at each dispatch console)
1. The Fire Department will respond to structure fires on a 1st, 2nd and 3rd alarm basis. Dispatch would have a list of
these alarms and what they mean so that the fire OIC won’t have to contact dispatch and request each resource
individually. The breakdown is as follows:
a. First Alarm Response
I. A station page by RPD dispatch informing RFD of the location of the reported fire and all related
information.
II. One Class A Engine from the station responsible for the structure fire.
III. One Rescue from the station responsible for the structure fire.
IV. Dispatch responsibility would be to page the station responsible for the fire or alarm only.
b. Second Alarm Response
I. An “all stations” page by RPD dispatch informing all On-Duty personnel of the reported structure
fire and its location.
II. One Class A Engine from each station
III. One Chief Officer
IV. One ambulance from LCEMS
V. All available RPD law enforcement personnel for traffic/scene control
VI. Zia Natural Gas (Ph: 378-4277)
VII. PNM Electric (Ph: 505-241-2475)
VIII. Water Department (Ph: 257-2386 or 937-8048 if after hours)
IX. Dispatch responsibility would be to page a “Second Alarm” page with the location and
relevant information. Dispatch would then page and ambulance and contact Zia, PNM,
Water Department and all available RPD officers.
1. Proper dispatch for Second Alarm: “Stand by for 2nd Alarm Page: (Initiate ON DUTY
page) All ON DUTY fire personnel, respond to (address) for second alarm.”
c.

Third Alarm Response (as requested by fire OIC)
I. An “All Call” page by RPD Dispatch informing all off-duty personnel of the reported structure fire
and its location.
II. One Class A Engine from each station
III. One Chief Officer
IV. One ambulance from LCEMS
V. All available RPD law enforcement personnel for traffic/scene control
VI. Zia Natural Gas (Ph: 378-4277)
VII. PNM Electric (Ph: 505-241-2475)
VIII. Water Department (Ph: 257-2386 or 937-8048 if after hours)
IX. Fire Investigator from the State Fire Marshal’s Office (Ph: 505-827-9377)
X. Dispatch responsibility would be to page an “All Call” page with the location and relevant
information, an ambulance, Zia, PNM, Water Department, all available RPD Officers and a
Fire Investigator from the Fire Marshal’s Office.
1. Proper Dispatch for Third Alarm: “Standby for 3rd Alarm Page: (Initiate ALL CALL
page) All fire personnel respond to (address) for third alarm.”

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

CALL SPECIFIC QUESTIONING

FLOOD
Response:
Combined agency response. Number of responders will depend on size of the flood and number of injuries or
entrapped people. Notify the Emergency Manager and Dispatch Supervisor
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü

Is anyone in danger?
Location of flooding?
Size of flood?
Is anyone trapped?
Are sandbags or barricades needed? (If yes, notify street department)

FUEL SPILL/GAS LEAK
Response:
On-duty fire units. PD units if traffic control is needed, or if spill is result of accident.
Notify State Police if fuel spill is large.
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü

What kind of fuel is leaking (gasoline, diesel, natural gas)?
What is the source of the leak?
Amount of fuel on the ground?
What type of fuel?
Source of the spill?
Is the fuel/gas still spilling or has it been stopped?
If from a vehicle, have the vehicle remain on scene.
If natural gas, have the caller vacate the building.

Small fuel spills or gas leaks can be handled by the fire department and police. State police handles the spill as a HAZMAT
if it is 55 gallons or greater. Local responders are NOT hazmat certified responders, ONLY STATE POLICE. Therefore,
if the spill meets the standard for SP response, SP MUST be dispatched. Natural Gas leaks will require contacting the
natural gas company (usually Zia Gas 378-4277). Additionally, if the gas leak is the result of a pipeline being struck,
additional steps must be taken to insure public and responder safety. There is a separate manual in dispatch that is for
natural gas pipeline emergencies. It is located next to the NCIC manuals.
GAS SKIP
Response:
1 PD unit minimum if the amount of theft is over $50.00, or, if under $50.00 and the caller has driver or license
plate.
ü Suspect and/or vehicle description (including direction of travel and license plate)
ü Amount value of skipped sale
We do not take reports on gas skips under $50.00. Generating a call card and providing the incident number to the calling
party will suffice. If the gas skip is over $50.00 then an officer can be sent for report. The caller will need to provide a
complete description, including license plate number on the suspect vehicle.

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

CALL SPECIFIC QUESTIONING

GUN SHOT/STABBING VICTIM (SEE ALSO INDIVIDUAL PAGES FOR SHOOTING & STABBING RESPONSE)
Response:
2 PD unit minimum and a Patrol Supervisor. EMS/FD should be paged, with instruction for them to stage for scene
to be secured.
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü

When did the offense occur?
Is the suspect still on scene and armed? If not, is it possible the suspect is still in the area?
If the suspect is gone, what is the mode and direction of travel, and how long have they been gone?
Is the victim conscious and breathing?
Where is the victim’s injury?
Does the caller know where the suspect may be or where he may have gone?

If you are EMD certified, administer EMD directions according to the flow charts. If the victim appears to be deceased, per
the caller, notify responding units in order for them to handle the crime scene appropriately as a possible homicide.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS (HAZMAT)
Response:
2 PD unit minimum. 1 EMS and fire unit minimum, State Police HAZMAT officer. (Notify the Dispatch Supervisor
if it is a large enough spill, or complex enough scene that extra comm. personnel may be required.)
ü Can the caller see any placards? What color is the placard? Can they make out any words or numbers on the
placard?
ü What type of hazardous material (exactly) involved?
ü If the spill is the result of a traffic accident, how many vehicles are involved and are they exposed to the hazardous
material?
ü Is the caller involved?
ü What is the caller seeing, hearing, smelling?
ü What is the source of material (tanker truck, barrel, etc.)?
ü What form is the material in (liquid, powder, solid, gas)?
ü Is anyone hurt? Is an ambulance needed?
State police are certified HAZMAT officers and will be notified to respond to ANY HAZMAT SITUATION. Based on placard
numbers and/or colors, determine what type of hazardous material is involved and evacuate the area or handle as indicated
in the yellow Emergency Response Guidebook for hazardous materials. Always advise responders from the initial dispatch
that this is a hazardous materials situation. If the Emergency Response Guidebook indicates that it is a volatile or
dangerous substance, advise responders, and have them stage or keep an appropriate distance. Instruct caller to remain
out of the scene if possible and have them try and keep others from entering the scene. A bystander entering a hazmat
scene to help the injured only creates more exposures and more injuries.

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

CALL SPECIFIC QUESTIONING

KIDNAPPING/CHILD ENTICEMENT
Response:
In progress/just occurred: 2 PD unit minimum and a Patrol Supervisor
Delayed report: 1 PD unit and notify a Patrol Supervisor
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü

When did the offense occur?
Was a weapon displayed or indicated? If so, what type of weapon?
What is the suspect and/or vehicle description?
Direction of travel for the suspect?
Does the caller know the suspect?
If it is a successful abduction, meaning the child has been taken, obtain a full description of the child, including
clothing, as well as the suspect and vehicle, and broadcast it to responders and all surrounding agencies
immediately.

It is imperative that you dispatch officers and initiate a BOLO immediately. Notify neighboring agencies in the quickest
manner possible, to include an NCIC Statewide Administrative Message if possible. In the case of a kidnapping, an AMBER
ALERT will have to be initiated by the State Police once the scene supervisor states it is necessary.
LINES DOWN
Response:
1 PD unit minimum. Fire unit if lines are arcing.
Notify the appropriate service (power company, phone company, etc.)
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü

What type of line is down?
Is it arcing? If so, are any trees or structures exposed to the arc?
Is the line actually on the ground, or partially down?
How many lines are down?
What is the caller seeing, hearing, smelling?

LOOSE DOGS
Response:
Animal Control Unit
1 PD unit if ACO is not available
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü

At what location is the dog loose and when was it last seen?
Do you know where the dog belongs, or to whom?
What is the description of the dog (color, size, breed, collar or not, etc.)?
Is the dog vicious? (If yes, handle as a vicious animal)
Do you know if this is a dog that runs loose habitually?

NOTE: Patrol units will not be able to transport dogs to the shelter if they are located. They are only able to attempt to find
an owner and have the owner retrieve the dog. Animal transport is only to be done in an Animal Control unit.

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

CALL SPECIFIC QUESTIONING

MEDICAL CALLS
Response:
Out of town emergencies or transfers: Page Medic 1 (or next call if M1 is busy. EMS initiated transfers will be
paged
by medic unit. EX: 509 & 516, and will be determined by ALS personnel requesting the transfer page.)
In town emergencies: Medic unit and on-duty Fire/rescue unit
ü Where is the emergency? What is the nature of the emergency?
ü How did patient receive the injury? (If injury is result of criminal act, dispatch PD and have medical responders
stage.)
ü What is the exact location of the patient?
ü Obtain a description of the residence, building or vehicle that the patient is in, or near.
After obtaining location and chief complaint, dispatch appropriate units and then immediately initiate EMD instructions (if
you are EMD certified). If it is possible suicide, overdose, or the injury came as the result of violence or criminal offense,
send PD to secure the scene, advising medical units to stage. If the call is a request for mutual aid to the Reservation,
or Otero County, then notify the ALS units as to who made the mutual aid request.
NOTE: Patient lift assist calls are NOT police calls. EMS and Fire should be dispatched to handle patient lift assists.
MISSING PERSON/RUNAWAY
Response:
1 PD unit unless the subject just left, then dispatch a second unit to ATL while the first unit takes the report.
Initiate a BOLO to surrounding jurisdictions.
ü
ü
ü
ü

Obtain the name, age and date of birth of the missing person. Obtain physical/clothing/vehicle description.
When and where were they last seen?
What condition were they in when they left? (Depressed, intoxicated, suicidal, etc.?)
Does the caller have a possible location or destination for the person?

We do not take missing person or runaway reports for other jurisdictions. If the subject of the report is believed to be in
our jurisdictional area, we may take the information and disseminate it as a BOLO, but the initial report and NCIC entry
must be handled by the jurisdiction that the subject is missing from.
NARCOTICS VIOLATION/DRUGS CALL
Response:
2 PD unit minimum
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü

What exactly is going on?
How does the caller know this information?
Suspect information? (names, vehicles/descriptions, physical descriptors of suspects, etc.)
Where is the caller in relation to the incident?
Is it in progress?
Provide information and copy of call card to NEU, regardless if the call is in progress or past tense.

If the call is in progress, dispatch accordingly. If it has already taken place, refer the information to the Narcotics
Enforcement Unit (NEU) and give the caller their phone number (575-648-2402) in order for them to provide the information
to NEU first hand.

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

CALL SPECIFIC QUESTIONING

OPEN DOOR/WINDOW (UNSECURED BUILDING)
Response:
2 PD unit minimum
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü

What is the location of the unsecured building?
Which doors/windows are open?
Did the calling party see anyone enter, or inside the building? (If so, dispatch the call as a breaking and entering)
Is the caller inside the unsecured premises? (If so, have them exit the building.)
If the caller is already outside, have them remain there, if safe to do so, for officer contact.
Keep the caller on line until officers make the scene in order to update responders with any new information.

RAPE (CSC/CSP)
Response:
2 PD unit minimum, notify a Patrol Supervisor and Victim Advocate
If in progress or injuries present, page EMS/FD to stage
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü

Is this in progress?
Is an ambulance needed?
Is the caller also the victim?
What is the condition of the patient? If EMD is needed handle accordingly if you are EMD certified.
Is the suspect(s) still on scene? If not, how long ago did he/she leave?
Were any weapons used? Type?
Number of suspects?
Vehicle description (if applicable) and direction of travel?
Keep caller on line if safe to do so. If not safe to do so, ask them to lay phone down and leave an open line. If an
open line still puts the caller/victim in danger, allow them to hang up.

Advise the caller/victim not to disturb any evidence and to refrain from washing or changing clothing. If they have already
done so, and the clothing has not been washed, ask them to gather the clothing for collection as evidence. It is imperative
that, in the case that EMS is needed, that they stage for PD. This assures the safety of the responders as well as the
preservation of the scene and evidence for investigation.

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

CALL SPECIFIC QUESTIONING

ROBBERY
Response:
In progress: 2 PD unit minimum and Patrol Supervisor. If injuries present, page EMS/FD to stage.
Delayed report: 1 PD unit and BOLO suspect information to surrounding agencies.
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü

Is this in progress?
Is an ambulance needed? (if so, have them respond and stage until scene secure.)
Is suspect still on scene? If no, how long ago did they leave?
Suspect information? (names, vehicles/descriptions, physical descriptors of suspects, etc.)
Were any weapons used?
Number of suspects?
Direction of travel of suspects
Advise the caller not to disturb any evidence.
If suspects are gone, have the caller secure/lock the doors windows to the location.

IN PROGRESS: Keep the caller on line if safe to do so. If keeping them on line puts them in danger, allow them to hang
up. If they are able to safely do so, ask them to refrain from hanging up and instead lay the phone down to maintain an
open line. If they are under duress, ask simple questions that can be answered with a yes or no. Make sure to ascertain
if anyone is injured and handle accordingly. If there are injuries and medics are required, advise them to stage. (This
guarantees responder safety as well as scene and evidence preservation.) If possible, ascertain condition of any victims
and provide EMD instruction if you are certified to do so.
DELAYED REPORT (AFTER THE FACT): If the robbery has already occurred, get the time of occurrence and detailed
suspect description and direction/mode of travel. Find out what was taken. If they are concerned the robbery suspects
may return, make sure they have secured the doors/windows where they are and keep them on line until responders arrive.
Notify surrounding agencies as soon as possible with regard to the incident and suspects.
SHOOTING
(FOR ACTIVE SHOOTER, SEE ACTIVE SHOOTER RESPONSE)
Response:
In progress: 2 PD unit minimum, and a Patrol Supervisor. If in progress and extra comm. personnel will be needed,
contact Dispatch Supervisor.
EMS/Fire to stage
Delayed report: 1 PD unit and BOLO suspect information to surrounding agencies.
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü

Is this in progress?
How many suspects?
Is/Are suspect(s) still on scene? Where is/are suspect(s) right now (where in building, etc.)?
What kind of weapons and how many?
Suspect description? Suspect vehicle description?
Is anyone injured? If yes, how many and nature of injury?
Where are the injured parties?
If caller is on scene, is the caller in a safe area, or exposed to shooter?
Can caller get to a secure area safely?

Shooting calls can be very dangerous for all responders. Obtaining accurate information and disseminating it quickly and
effectively to responding units is critical in minimizing responder exposure and reducing injuries or deaths on scene.
Additionally, obtaining information about the number and types of weapons will make it easier for responders to approach
and/or stage safely out of range.
Shooting calls, especially in progress, will usually have multiple callers, many of whom will be panicked or in shock.
Effective use of calming tactics and caller control will be vital. Additionally, do not discount any information given by any
caller. Sometimes, what may seem to you like an insignificant piece of information, or one that is incorrect, will prove to be
vital and/or life-saving.

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

CALL SPECIFIC QUESTIONING

SHOPLIFTING/THEFT
Response:
In progress: 2 PD unit minimum
Delayed report: 1 PD unit and BOLO suspect information to surrounding agencies.
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü

Is this in progress?
Are suspects still on scene?
Suspect description?
If shoplifting, is the suspect in the store’s custody?
If not in custody, obtain the direction and mode of travel and what was taken.
What is the value of the item(s) taken?

STABBING/CUTTING
Response:
In progress: 2 PD unit minimum, and a Patrol Supervisor
EMS/Fire to stage
Delayed report: 1 PD unit and BOLO suspect information to surrounding agencies.
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü

Is this in progress?
How many suspects?
Is/Are suspect(s) still on scene? Where is/are suspect(s) right now (where in building, etc.)?
What kind of weapons and how many?
Suspect description? Suspect vehicle description?
Is anyone injured? If yes, how many and nature of injury? Is caller injured?
Where are the injured parties?
If caller is on scene, is the caller in a safe area, or exposed to shooter?
Can caller get to a secure area safely?
(continued next page)

Stabbing calls can be very dangerous for all responders. Obtaining accurate information and disseminating it quickly and
effectively to responding units is critical in minimizing responder exposure and reducing injuries or deaths on scene.
Additionally, obtaining information about the number and types of weapons will make it easier for responders to approach
and/or stage safely out of range. Remember, ballistic vests do not stop knives or cutting instruments. Officers have
no “knife-proof vests” in a situation such as a stabbing.
Additionally, stabbing calls, especially in progress, will usually have multiple callers, many of who will be panicked or in
shock. Many people see blood and trauma and will go into hysterics repeatedly. Effective use of calming tactics and caller
control will be vital. Additionally, do not discount any information given by any caller. Sometimes, what may seem to you
like an insignificant piece of information, or one that is incorrect, will prove to be vital and/or life-saving.
STOLEN VEHICLE (10-75)
Response:
In progress: 2 PD unit minimum
Delayed report: 1 PD unit and BOLO stolen vehicle information to surrounding agencies.
Is this in progress?
When did the theft occur?
Is the suspect known? Description of suspect?
Obtain a description of the vehicle, to include license plate and direction of travel if known.
Were the keys in the vehicle?
Was the vehicle loaned to anyone?
Might the vehicle have been repossessed?
Is the caller the registered owner? (If no, then ask to speak with the R/O, or advise caller that the R/O must make
the report.)
ü If you are unable to speak directly to the registered owner, BOLO the vehicle as stolen until the report can be
taken.
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

CALL SPECIFIC QUESTIONING

SUICIDE/ATTEMPTED SUICIDE
Response:
In progress: 2 PD unit minimum and Patrol Supervisor. If injuries present, page EMS/FD to stage.
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü

Is the caller the one attempting to commit suicide? If not, then who is the suicidal subject?
Can the caller see what’s happening?
Is the suicidal subject intoxicated?
How does the person intend to harm themselves?
Is the suicidal subject already injured? (If yes, and you are certified to do so, initiate EMD protocol.)
Keep the caller calm and reassure them that you are there to help.

Find out if they have taken any action toward suicide, or if they are just contemplating suicide. Do they have the implements
they are considering using on hand? Ask if there is a history of suicide attempt, and if so, why. Do not be afraid to ask
specific questions and try to gain the subject’s trust. Don’t make any false promises or tell them any lies. Try to make sure
that the subject puts any weapons away before responding units make entry. It’s usually a good idea to have an ambulance
staged and on standby in case the subject attempts suicide or tries to harm the responders. (There are subjects who want
to commit suicide “by cop.” In these situations, inform the responders of the subject’s intentions. Often the subjects
become rash, brandishing weapons, etc., in order to force the police to inflict lethal force.)
SUICIDE HOTLINE NUMBERS
1-800-SUICIDE (1-800-784-2433)
1-800-273-TALK (1-800-273-8255)
1-800-799-4TTY (1-800-799-4889) for deaf callers
SUSPICIOUS (ACTIVITY/PERSON/VEHICLE)
Response:
2 PD unit minimum
ü
ü
ü
ü

What activity is taking place?
Obtain a description of the suspects/vehicles
Are any weapons involved/seen?
Are any subjects intoxicated/impaired?

TRESPASSING
Response:
In progress: 2 PD unit minimum
Delayed report: 1 PD unit
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü

Is this in progress?
Who is trespassing? (Obtain suspect/vehicle descriptions.)
Is there a threat of violence?
Are “No Trespassing” signs posted?
Has a trespass warning been issued against this person previously?

If the suspect is known, you may want to check the criminal trespass log for prior criminal trespass warnings that may have
been issued.

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

CALL SPECIFIC QUESTIONING

UNATTENDED DEATH
Response:
2 PD unit minimum, EMS/FIRE to stage, notify Shift Commander
If there is an obvious state of decomposition/decay (i.e. it is not a recently dead body), EMS/FD may not be
required. Confirm their response with Shift Commander. EMS/FD response not required if the reporting party is a
medical or law enforcement professional that is certified/trained to call it as a death (i.e. hospice nurse, doctor,
medic, firefighter, on-duty police officer).
ü Are you positive the subject is deceased? Why? (Answers such as they are cold, blue, stiff, may indicate time
they have been deceased)
ü Can you tell what caused their death? (If there is any evidence of struggle, trauma, violence, incoming PD units
will need to be made aware, and on call detective will need to be notified.)
ü How is the caller related to the decedent?
ü Is the caller a medical professional (doctor, registered nurse, paramedic)?
If there is an obvious state of decomposition/decay (i.e. it is not a recently dead body), EMS/FD may not be required.
Confirm their response with Shift Commander. EMS/FD response not required if the reporting party is a medical or law
enforcement professional that is certified/trained to call it as a death (i.e. hospice nurse, doctor, medic, firefighter, on-duty
police officer). If subject is still warm, or the caller is unsure of the state of death, proceed with CPR/life-saving instructions.
If it is obvious the subject is dead (decay, lividity, rigor), and that life-saving procedures are not necessary, ask the caller
to exit the scene and remain outside until PD arrive (to preserve the crime scene).
UNWANTED SUBJECT
Response:
2 PD unit minimum
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü

What is the person doing?
Who is the suspect?
What is their location? Are they inside or outside?
Do they have any weapons?
Are they intoxicated or armed? If armed, what type of weapon?

VICIOUS ANIMAL
Response:
Animal Control Unit minimum
May require PD unit depending on viciousness and type of animal.
EMS/FD if the animal caused injury
Game & Fish if the vicious animal is wild game
ü What type of animal is being reported as vicious?
o If a wild animal, see WILD ANIMAL call
ü At what location and when was the animal last seen?
ü What is the description of the animal?
ü Do you know to whom the animal belongs, or where it belongs?
ü Is anyone injured?
o If yes, then dispatch EMS/FD but inform them that the vicious animal may still be at large so that they can
be on alert.

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

CALL SPECIFIC QUESTIONING
WELFARE CHECK
Response:
2 PD unit minimum
EMS/fire (to stage) if subject is to be violent or injured.
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü

What is the reason for the check?
Who is being checked on?
What is the caller’s relationship to the subject of the check?
What was the last time of contact?
What was the subject’s condition or demeanor at that time?
Is there reason to believe that the subject may become violent?
Is there reason to believe that the subject may be injured?
Obtain a callback number for the caller.

Once a disposition has been obtained from the responding officer, dispatch should attempt to contact the person requesting
the welfare check to inform them of the result. This callback should be made by the responding officer, or the PIO, if the
welfare check resulted in discovery of death, a crime, or a trauma.
WILD ANIMALS
Response:
1 Animal Control Unit minimum
PD Units (if ACO is off-duty, or there’s a need for an assist)
EMS/FD to stage (if there’s injury to bystanders)
Game & Fish (unless animal falls under the “pest” category)
ü What type of animal?
o If the animal is a raccoon, skunk, squirrel, bat or other similar animal, refer the caller to vermin control.
o If the animal is a wild animal such as a deer, elk, cougar or bear, you will also need to notify Game & Fish
ü What is the complaint? (Is the animal being aggressive? Is it a dangerous animal? Is it a nuisance or traffic hazard?)
o If the animal is a cougar, notify Game & Fish. Dispatch units to get eyes on the animal and verify the public
is not in immediate danger.
o If the animal is a bear, notify Game & Fish. Dispatch units to ensure public safety. Our units will occasionally
scare bears away from populated areas or help remove them to a safer area pending Game & Fish
response.
We generally do not handle wild animal calls unless there’s a danger to the public. Complaints about nuisance bears or
other wild animals (that do not fall under the “pest” category) that are not an immediate public threat will need to be directed
to Game & Fish.
WILDLIFE FEEDING BAN (Applies to Village of Ruidoso only)
Response:
1 Animal Control Unit minimum
ü What type of animal?
o If the animal is any wild animal, excluding birds, animal control shall be dispatched.
§ Waterfowl are the only exception to bird feeding.
§ Birdfeeders must be hung so that they are accessible only to birds. If they are accessible to any
other wildlife, they are in violation.
ü What is the attractant being used?
o Ornamental plants, vegetable gardens and properly hung bird feeders shall not be considered “attractants.”
ü Does the caller know if there a history of feeding wildlife at this location? (Dispatch can also check for prior calls at
the location to verify.)
Animal Control will be dispatched to all reports of prohibited feeding of wildlife. First offenses will result in written warnings.
Citations will be issued for subsequent offenses.

RADIO OPERATIONS

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

RADIO OPERATIONS
RADIO CHANNELS
v RPD-4: Primary Ruidoso Police channel
v RPD-8: Secondary Ruidoso Police channel
v R DOWNS: Primary Ruidoso Downs channel
v REMS FIRE: Lincoln Co. ALS (also used by other agencies to page ALS)( could be backup for RPD fire)
v RUIDOSO FD: Primary Ruidoso Fire channel
v NMSP: New Mexico State Police car-to-car channel
v LCSO: Lincoln County Sheriff’s Office primary channel
v AIRPORT: Sierra Blanca Regional Airport (SBRA)
v LC EMS FD: Lincoln County EMS/Fire channel
v RUI PUB WK: Other Village departments, primarily Solid Waste, Water, and Street Depts.
SELECT VS. UNSELECT CHANNELS
v The SELECT channel is the primary channel that the dispatcher is operating off of.
o Generally RPD-4.
o Marked by a fluorescent green bar highlighted at the top of the channel button.
o Transmitting on the SELECT channel can be accomplished by pressing the red “Transmit” button on the
radio console, depressing the foot pedal under your console, or by positioning the cursor (Z) over the
unselect channel and pressing and holding the right mouse button. Release the right mouse button to
stop transmitting. You can also utilize the transmit button on your wireless headset, if the headset is
something that you opt to use.
v The UNSELECT channels are used for non-primary traffic
o Transmitting on the UNSELECT channel can be accomplished by positioning the cursor (Z) over the
unselect channel and pressing and holding the right mouse button. Release the right mouse button to
stop transmitting.
v To change a channel from UNSELECT to SELECT:
o Left click with the mouse on the channel you want to change to the select channel.
o Left click on SELECT option button at lower left of screen.

CHANGING CHANNEL VOLUME
v In order to change the volume on a radio channel via the computer console, you must first make sure the channel is
selected in blue. Once the channel is highlighted in blue (done by placing the cursor over the channel and left clicking),
you may then adjust the volume by doing the following:
o Left click on “VOL á” or “VOL â” to adjust the volume appropriately. Said buttons are located at the lower
left corner of your Zetron screen.
o If you do not see the volume adjustment buttons, left click the “AUX-I/O” button (located on the vertical
menu on the right side of the Zetron screen), and they should appear.
v You may also adjust the radio volume by using the SELECT and UNSELECT volume knobs on the radio console. You
should be aware, however, that using the UNSLECT knob will also adjust the entire bank of unselected channels, not
just one specific channel.
DETERMINING IF YOU ARE TRANSMITTING OR RECEIVING
v Transmitting (i.e. you are broadcasting to field units): You will have an indicator at the bottom left corner of the channel
button that looks like this: BSY
v Receiving (i.e. you are being broadcast to from the field units): You will have an indicator at the top left corner of the
channel button that looks like this: CALL

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

RADIO OPERATIONS

PAGING FUNCTIONS
v Notifications of certain services are accomplished with a radio page. All EMS and Fire calls for service will be initiated
by a page, as well as all PD calls that also require EMS and Fire response (10-45, lost child, violent crime with injuries,
etc.)
v PAGING EMS:
o To page a medical unit:
§ Left click on PAGE SELECT button (right hand side of screen, vertical buttons)
§ Left click on the appropriate tower for FD/EMS PAGING* button (bottom of screen, horizontal)
§ Left click on EMS
§ Press Page Safety button on the radio console (near the mic)
§ Wait for tone to complete and announce unit that you are calling, location of emergency, and chief
complaint of patient.
§ If it is a call requiring police response as well, and EMS responders safety could be compromised
by their arrival on scene, advise them to “stage for scene security” until PD makes the scene and
advises it is safe for medical personnel to make entry.
v PAGING FIRE:
o To page a fire unit:
§ Left click on PAGE SELECT button (right hand side of screen, vertical buttons)
§ Left click on the appropriate tower for Ruidoso FD PAGING button (bottom of screen, horizontal)
§ Left click on FIRE ON DUTY
§ Press Page Safety button on the radio console (near the mic)
§ Wait for tone to complete and announce on duty fire, location of emergency, and nature of call
(smoke investigation, brush fire, etc.)
§ If it is a call requiring police response as well, and responders safety could be compromised by
their arrival on scene, advise them to “stage for scene security” until PD makes the scene and
advises it is safe for medical personnel to make entry.
§ In addition, major fire calls, such as structure fires, wild land fires, etc., will also require PD and
EMS response and will have to be handled accordingly.
v PAGING EMS and FIRE:
o To page EMS and Fire jointly:
§ Left click on PAGE SELECT button (right hand side of screen, vertical buttons)
§ Left click on EMS FIRE
§ Press Page Safety button on the radio console (near the mic)
§ Wait for tone to complete and announce unit you are calling, location of emergency, and nature of
call.
§ If it is a call requiring police response as well, and responders safety could be compromised by
their arrival on scene, advise them to “stage for scene security” until PD makes the scene and
advises it is safe for medical personnel to make entry.
v PAGING EMS, FIRE and PD (combined agency page):
o To page EMS, FIRE and PD:
§ Dispatch the Police call as normal in the primary Police channel.
§ Follow procedures for paging EMS/FD combined.
§ If necessary, be sure to announce to fire and EMS units to “stage for scene security” until PD
makes the scene and advises it is safe for medical personnel to make entry.

* The appropriate tower will be determined by Fire Department as needed and will be either CAM or PIKE P

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

RADIO OPERATIONS
BASIC RADIO ETIQUETTE
v There are certain expectations with regard to etiquette on the radio. Listed below are a few of the expectations of both
supervisory and field unit staff:
Ø When dispatching Police units on a call for service, it is expected that the dispatcher will do so in the following manner:
o Announce units you are calling to handle, with primary unit called first, and then state “ 10-65, [type of call]”
§ EX: “626, 636, 10-65” (This tells 626 that you are calling him as primary with 636 called as backup.)
o Wait for both units to acknowledge your call and then re-announce their unit numbers and type of call, then
advise location and pertinent details of call.
§ EX: “626 636 10-44 at 144 Sudderth Dr. Red pickup and Blue car, no injuries, in the roadway.
o If possible run all involved parties and license plates through NCIC before units make the scene so that
you are able to advise them if any of the involved parties of vehicles might be wanted.
Ø When dispatching EMS or Fire units on a call for service, it is expected that the dispatcher will do so in the following
manner:
o Initiate Page (Announcing page prior to initiation of page is not necessary)
o Announce units you are calling, and the location and nature of emergency.
§
“Ruidoso EMS (or Lincoln County ALS) and On-Duty Fire, services requested at 107 Jack Little
Dr., Apt C (Charlie) 5 for a female complaining of chest pain. Patient is conscious and breathing.”
v When a police unit requests a 10-28, or a “rolling 10-28” it is expected that the dispatch will run and disseminate the
10-28 information in a timely manner, and with expediency. The same goes for OLN/Persons checks. On occasion,
after an officer runs a 10-28, and is given the registration information, they will ask “DOB on file?” If an officer asks
this question, he is requesting that you use the DOB on file to run an OLN and wanted persons check on the registered
owner of the vehicle. This should also be done with expediency.
v All field responders expect routine welfare checks while they are on a call for service. Frequency of the checks will
depend on individual call type and situation.
v When fire units make the scene on a fire call, they will generally set up an Incident Command. You will know this is
the case when 300 advises, “300, Ruidoso, I’ll be [location] IC.” From this point on, all traffic directed toward any fire
unit will be directed through the IC.
EX: Structure fire at Alpine Village
300 will advise that he is assuming Alpine Village IC.
Any traffic for a ground unit will be addressed as follows: “Ruidoso to Alpine Village IC: [give traffic]”

CAD
(Computer-Aided Dispatch)

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL
BASIC SLEUTH/CAD OVERVIEW
BASIC CAD LOG IN AND ORIENTATION
LOGGING INTO SLEUTH SYSTEM
v To log into the SLEUTH CAD system:
v Double click on the SLEUTH icon on your desktop and wait for the log on prompt to appear.
v Enter your log on name and password
o Log on name should be your first initial and last name (no spaces)
o Password should be Police123 for the first log on, and will need to be changed after your first log on.
CAD WINDOW ORIENTATION
v Active Unit Section (Top)
o The Active Unit section of the CAD screen indicates location, status, and mark-out type of all on-duty units for
all services.
o Available units will be listed in the table, with no information listed following their unit number
v Active Calls Section (Middle)
o The Active Calls section of the CAD screen indicates status of active calls. Each active call listed in the window
will display until all units are cleared off of the call and it has been closed with a disposition.
o Active calls will contain the following information
§ AGENCY: Agency responding (Police/PD, Fire/FD, Medic/EM)
§ CALL ID (INCIDENT NUMBER): Number associated with the call for service.
à
Contains three parts:
o Agency responding: PD (Police), FD (Fire), EM (Medics)
o Two digit year call was generated (EX: 13)
o Four digit sequence number for the call. (EX: 000123)
o These combine to form the full incident number (EX: PD13000123)
§ CALL STATUS: indicator, next to the incident number, indicates status of the call
à Empty (nothing in window) = Call has not been assigned and is pending
à D: Call dispatched, no units on scene
à 97: Call dispatched, at least one unit is on scene
§ CALL TYPE: Nature of the call for service
§ CALL LOCATION: Address that the responders are responding to. This may be, and usually is, the same
as the location of the offense. However there are occasions when this address will be different than
the location at which the incident occurred.
o Busy units will display the following information:
§ Unit number
§ Location
§ Status indicator
à Status indicator is dependent upon the type of mark out (service call, or busy mark out)
à Call mark out indicators include: D (dispatched) and A (arrived)
à Out of service mark-outs are located in Comm. Reference sheets and are used for busy mark outs,
other than calls for service. They will be entered by dispatcher when entering a unit as busy in the
command entry window.
§ Length of time remaining on their mark out prior to needing welfare check.

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL
BASIC SLEUTH/CAD OVERVIEW

v Messages & Command Entry Section (bottom)
o The Messages and command entry section of the CAD window allows dispatch to view the most recent
commands entered by dispatch, and to manually enter the service mark outs for on-duty units. This is also the
CAD section that allows dispatch to log on units for duty and to show them off-duty at the end of their shift.
o

The command entry area is comprised of three sections for use by dispatch:
§ Unit number entry
à Used to enter the unit number of the field unit that is being logged on-duty, off-duty, or on a busy
mark out.
§ Status entry
à Used to enter the activity code of the unit being marked as busy.
§ Location entry
à Free form field used to enter the location of the busy mark out, and any other pertinent information
with regard to the mark out.

o

There is a fourth section, immediately following the location area, that allows the dispatcher to arrow down to
locate a Call ID on which to dispatch a unit, should the dispatcher opt to utilize the command entry window to
dispatch rather than the drag and drop option.

o

The command entry section may also be used to enter information into a unit’s history, without showing them
marked busy or on a call. This task is accomplished by entering the unit number in the unit number entry field,
tabbing past the status entry field, and then entering the information in the location entry field.

o

The command entry section is also used for marking units on traffic and subject stops.
§ Traffic stops should be entered in the following format:
à [Unit] [TS] [Location, License plate, Vehicle description, any other info given by ofcr.]
à EX: At 2130 hrs., 636 checks into traffic with a red Dodge pickup bearing NM license plate
ABC123. He advises he’s at Allsups at 2820 Sudderth Dr., and that the vehicle is occupied by two
people.
à Enter the information into the command entry section as follows:
636
§

TS

2820 SUDDERTH DR/ALLSUPS NM ABC123, RED DODG PK OCC X2

Subject stops should be entered in the same format as traffic stop

21:30

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL
BASIC SLEUTH/CAD OVERVIEW
HOT SHEET (F7)
v The Hot Sheet is a database used to enter information pertinent to pass down, or to notify dispatch and officers of
messages, close patrols, or other temporary information as needed in the performance of their duties.
v Viewing the Hot Sheet:
o Press F7, or click on the HOT SHEET button at the top of the CAD window. You may scroll through messages
by pressing up and down arrow keys.
o Each entry has a date/time that the message was created, and the actual message itself, with the user that
authorized or input the message indicated at the bottom left hand section of the screen. Next to the user’s
name is also a delete by date, which indicates when the message is no longer valid, and should be deleted
from the Hot Sheet.
o Once a message has been deleted from the Hot Sheet, you will be unable to access it again. Therefore, if
you are not the dispatcher who entered the message, or a supervisor, DO NOT delete any entries.
v Creating a new entry:
o Creating a new entry can be done by pressing F1, or the CREATE button at the bottom of the screen.
(NOTE: The message field is free-form, and can be typed in whatever format necessary for the user.)
o Upon entering a new message, the user should also modify the delete by date.
o To save the entry, press ESC.
v Modifying an entry:
o Modifying an already existing entry can be completed (after accessing the hot sheet) by selecting the entry
for modification and making the appropriate modification
o Once changes have been made to the entry, press ESC to save changes.
v Deleting an entry:
o Deleting an entry can be accomplished by selecting the message for deletion, and then pressing F3 or the
delete button at the bottom of the screen.

NCIC
(National Crime Information Computer)

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL
BASIC NCIC OVERVIEW
NCIC BASICS
v “N.C.I.C.” stands for National Crime Information Computer. This is a nationwide system maintained and monitored
by the FBI in Washington D.C. The capital city in each state also maintains a statewide database tied into the
NCIC system. Every agency that operates an NCIC terminal within the state reports to the main center in the state
capital which in turn reports to the FBI.
v Each agency that operates an NCIC terminal has a designated officer that handles maintaining the standards and
operating practices of the agency in compliance with NCIC state and national regulations. This designated officer
is referred to as the Terminal Agency Coordinator, or TAC.
v NCIC files contain information on wanted/missing persons, vehicles, guns, articles, etc., as well as criminal history
information and law-enforcement sensitive teletypes. Each agency is responsible for entry and maintenance of
their own files.
v NCIC is also interlinked with most Motor Vehicle Divisions in each state in order to provide valid drivers license
and vehicle registration records.
v All NCIC information is confidential. Dissemination of that information is strictly forbidden unless it is disseminated
to an authorized person or agency. An easy way to recall what types of sources are authorized to receive
teletype/NCIC information is to remember the phrase “Cops, Courts or Corrections.” Additionally, whenever an
operator is not at their console, the terminal must be locked to prevent unauthorized access.
v NCIC teletypes should never be faxed to anyone, even if they are authorized, or taken out of the building.
LOGGING IN TO NCIC
v To log into NCIC choose the internet explorer icon titled “NMLETS” (NM Law Enforcement Teletype System) on
the NCIC terminal by double clicking.
v Once the NMLETS face page comes up, you will need to select the appropriate system to log on to. Choose
NMLETS. (As a basic communications officer, you will not have access to CJIS, CCW, LEA, or any other systems.)
v Once selecting NMLETS, the log on screen will come up. You will enter your log on name (Your DL state and
number) and password.
v Once you’ve logged on, select the MASTER QUERY option on the left side of your OpenFox Messenger screen.
This will bring up the screen we use to run the majority of our traffic.
v Fill in the following fields in the MASTER QUERY box.
ü ORI: should auto -fill
ü STATE: NM
ü CONTROL FIELD: Your first initial and last name (JDOE)
ü PUR: C
ü ATTN: Your last name and first name (DOE,JOHN)

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL
BASIC NCIC OVERVIEW
LOGGING IN TO NCIC, CONT’D.
v During the course of your shift, there will be a few fields that will need to occasionally need to be changed. You’ll
need to change the following fields accordingly.
ü STATE: Type in the US Postal state code form whatever state you are checking for persons/vehicle
information.
ü Vehicle License Type: Change this code to the NCIC appropriate code if running special license types.
RUNNING VEHICLE AND PERSONS CHECKS
VEHICLE CHECKS ON TRAFFIC STOPS
v When an officer goes into traffic, the officer will provide the license plate of the vehicle in order to check for
wants/stolen. This check is performed by entering the plate provided into the Vehicle License field in the MASTER
QUERY box and then hitting enter (or clicking send).
v IF THE VEHICLE RETURNS WITH STOLEN/WANT STATUS
o Immediately notify another officer to proceed to the primary officer’s location.
o Ask the officer if he is present with the driver or any occupant of the vehicle by asking, “Ruidoso [unit
number], 10-12?”
o If the officer responds in the negative (i.e. he is clear to copy your traffic), advise him of the want/stolen
status.
o If the officer responds in the affirmative, then wait for him to advise that he’s available to copy traffic
and then give him the information on the vehicle’s want/stolen status.
o Follow officer’s instruction with regard to radio channel status.
v If the vehicle returns clear of want/stolen, but is showing expired:
o Advise officer of expired tag status, and then hold the rest of the vehicle information until it is requested.
v If the vehicle returns clear, updated/valid, with no want/stolen status:
o Hold the vehicle information until the officer requests it.
VEHICLE CHECKS (NOT TRAFFIC)
v On occasion, officers will request “10-28” or “rolling 28.” This is a request for immediate return of registration and
vehicle status information, and generally indicates that the officer is following the vehicle. Therefore, when they
request a 10-28 or rolling 28, run the vehicle and return the information immediately or as soon as possible.
o If vehicle returns with want/stolen, proceed the same as you would for an officer in traffic, after obtaining
the requesting officer’s location.
o If vehicle returns clear of want/stolen, then return the vehicle information in the following order:
§ Repeat plate number
§ Advise negative 10-29 status
§ Vehicle year/make/model (if known)/style
§ Expiration
§ Registered owner name and city
§ Insurance status
EX: “Ruidoso 601, 595HAR returns negative 10-29 on a 2005 Ford 4D, expires April 2009 to Duane or
Kelly Bullion out of Ruidoso. Status is insured.”
v If, after giving the 10-28 information, the officer asks “DOB on file” then the dispatcher will need to check the return
for a registered owner’s date of birth. If there is a date of birth listed, then run the registered owner by name and
date of birth and give the officer the 10-29 and OLN status on the vehicle’s registered owner.

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL
BASIC NCIC OVERVIEW
ARTICLES/GUNS
v Officers will sometimes request that an article or gun be checked for wants. There is not a place on the MASTER
QUERY screen to check these items, so it becomes necessary that dispatch check these items another way.
v Articles:
o Articles are any items that may be wanted or stolen that are not classified as guns, vehicles, persons, or
license plates.
o Checking articles requires that dispatch select QUERY on the left side of the OpenFox Messenger screen,
and then select QUERY ARTICLE in the menu field.
o The serial number field will auto select to query by type/serial number. Leave it as it is.
o Fill in the following:
§ CONTROL FIELD (This will be your initials, or your first initial/last name, EX: JDOE)
§ TYPE, which will be your article data code (codes are located in the NCIC reference manual, or
can be selected from a drop down menu in the TYPE field).
§ Serial number on the item
o Advise the officer of the article status.
v Guns:
o To check a gun for wanted/stolen status, choose QUERY on the left side of the OpenFox Messenger
screen, and then select QUERY GUN in the menu field.
o Fill in the Control field, and then enter the serial number only. (Any other fields are unnecessary.)
o Advise the officer of the gun status.

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL
EXTENDED NCIC OVERVIEW

HIT CONFIRMATION REQUESTS/RESPONSES (YQ/YR)
HIT CONFIRMATION REQUESTS
v During the course of your duties, you will occasionally receive requests from other agencies via teletype (TTY) to
confirm the status of a wanted, stolen or missing person, article, vehicle or gun. These requests are referred to as
hit confirmation requests, or “YQs.”
v A typical YQ contains the ORI of the requesting agency, the NIC number of the item or person they are requesting
confirmation on, the priority designation for the response requested, the OCA (originating agency’s case number),
and any miscellaneous information or request that the sending ORI feels it necessary to include. (See
Communications Manual Reference pages to see a typical YQ/YR format.)
v Upon receipt of the YQ, the Communications Officer will do the following:
1) Determine the validity of the want/warrant by obtaining the actual report or warrant (“hard copy”) from the
appropriate file;
2) Respond to the requesting ORI with a positive or negative confirmation response;
§ A negative response will be used if the warrant hard copy cannot be located, or extradition does
not apply from the jurisdiction requesting the confirmation.
3) Clearing the item or person from the NCIC file upon the receipt of a “LOCATE” message from the
requesting ORI, if appropriate.
§ Clearing the person or item from NCIC can be done by selecting the “Clear” folder on the left hand
side of the OpenFox Messenger page, and then selecting the appropriate type of clearance from
the drop down list.
v There are two priority designations for YQ transactions.
1) U = URGENT (receiving agency is required to respond within 10 mins.)
2) R = ROUTINE (receiving agency is required to respond within 1 hr.)
v Once a YQ is received, if the receiving agency does not respond in the allotted time frame, a second request will
be sent by the requesting agency. If no response is received within the allotted time frame for the second request,
a third request will be sent, at which time Santa Fe DPS headquarters will be notified, and they will contact the
receiving agency to determine the status of confirmation. If the receiving agency is contacted by DPS
headquarters, they may be subject to disciplinary action. If you do not receive a timely response after the first
request, contact the agency directly before opting to send a second request. If you’re the agency operator
receiving the hit request, always respond in a timely manner to the first request. If you need additional time, contact
the agency requesting by phone to inform them you are working on their request so that they do not automatically
send a second. Remember: all 2nd requests notify NMDPS, and all 3rd requests notify NMDPS and the FBI.
v In order to confirm or request confirmation on a record, you will use the following NMLETS form: HIT
CONFIRMATION.
1) Requesting from an ORI can be done by selecting “Request” under the “Hit Confirmation” folder on the left
side of the OpenFox Messenger window.
2) Responding to the ORI can be done by right clicking on the hit confirmation request and selecting “YR,” or
by selecting “Response” under the “Hit Confirmation” folder on the left side of your OpenFox Messenger
page.

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

EXTENDED NCIC OVERVIEW
HIT CONFIRMATION REQUESTS/RESPONSES (YQ/YR) CONT.’D
v Once you have pulled up the HIT CONFIRMATION form, you will be required to fill in the following fields:
• ORI (Auto-filled): Ruidoso PD ORI
• Destination ORI: ORI of the agency you are contacting.
• Control Field: Dispatcher’s name, unless it is a Texas hit, and then it will be whatever Texas sends in
theirs.
• Request Type: Drop down menu allowing CO to select what type of record will be confirmed.
• Request #: The number of the request you’ve sent (if you are the requesting agency).
• Confirmation Status: Y - Record confirmed, N - record not confirmed, E - valid, but awaiting extradition
instructions, or P - In process of confirming. (If you are the confirming agency).
• Confirmation Hours: This only has to be filled out if your CONFIRMATION STATUS is P (in process) and
should indicate the number of hours you will need to confirm the record.
• Confirmation Priority: Urgent (must respond in 10 minutes) or Routine (must respond within 1 hour). This
is if you are the requesting agency.
• Agency Case: Originating agency’s case number
• NCIC: The NCIC number of the record being confirmed
• Requester/Confirmer & Requesting/Confirming Agency: This will be auto-filled with your name and
agency.

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

EXTENDED NCIC OVERVIEW
HIT CONFIRMATION REQUESTS/RESPONSES (YQ/YR) CONT.’D
HIT CONFIRMATION REQUESTS (cont.’d)
v You will then have to go to the final screen which will give you the location to enter the following information:
• Requestor’s Name (RNA) or Confirmer’s Name (CNA)
• Requesting Agency (RAG) or Confirmer’s Agency (CAG)
• Agency phone number and fax (PHO and FAX)
• Remarks (This is a free form field; however, you cannot use punctuation)
o The remarks field should indicate the following information:
§ If CONFIRMING a record:
• Whether or not the record is valid
• Extradition requirements/restrictions (if wanted subject)
v NOTE: If the warrant is valid, but non-extraditable from the area of the
confirming agency, then the field for CONFIRMATION STATUS should be N
(no).
• Special instructions
• Bond amount (if wanted subject)
• Instructions with regard to return of service on warrants
• Request for locate
§ If REQUESTING CONFIRMATION on a record:
• For ORI to confirm validity of the outstanding record
• Whether or not they will extradite from your jurisdiction (if wanted subject)
• Bond amount (if wanted subject)
• Special instructions (Where the person/item will be held, etc.)
• Indication as to whether or not you will be sending a locate
v Once you have completed the HIT CONFIRMATION, tear off the teletype, and record it in the NCIC transactions
book under the appropriate section. If your HIT CONFIRMATION transaction was a response, attach it to the
original request, and place it in the AM folder. If your transaction was a request, then wait for a response to your
TTY, attach the response and your LOCATE message (once completed) to your original request and place it back
in the AM folder.
LOCATE TELETYPES
LOCATE TELETYPES
v Once you, as a requester, have been provided with positive confirmation on a wanted/stolen/missing person or
item, you must then send a LOCATE teletype to the Originating Agency, informing them that you have located said
person or item. To complete a LOCATE transaction, you must do the following:
o Select LOCATE from the left-hand side of your OpenFox Messenger screen.
o Select the appropriate type of LOCATE message (Wanted Person, Article, Boat, etc.)
o Fill in the following required fields:
§ Control Field: Your first initial and Last name
§ Record Identifiers: This will vary based on the type of record you are indicating as located. They
will need to be filled in exactly as listed on the wanted/stolen/missing hit from the Originating
Agency.
§ NCIC #: This is also located on the hit from the Originating Agency
§ Extradition (if wanted person)
v You can also create a LOCATE with the required information auto-filled, by right clicking on the MKE of the
Response (located at the top of your OpenFox Messenger screen), and selecting the option to “Send Locate.”

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

EXTENDED NCIC OVERVIEW
CLEARANCES
v Upon the recovery of a wanted/missing person or item by an outside agency, you are required to clear that person
or item from NCIC, insuring that they will not still be listed as wanted or missing after they have been recovered.
The procedure for clearing the person or item is as follows
o Remove the original packet from the appropriate file (Warrant/Article/Gun, etc.)
o Select CLEAR from the left side of your OpenFox Messenger screen.
o Select the appropriate type of clearance (Person/Vehicle/etc.)
o Fill in the Record Identifiers for whatever record you are attempting to clear, along with the NCIC number,
or the Agency Case number (when required).
o Pull the clearance teletype and affix it to the front of the original entry packet. Place the packet in the
Records inbox for all records except wanted persons.
o If the clearance is on a wanted person, you will need to pull the original warrant, and the OLN return & III
from the packet before affixing the clearance and turning the packet over to the dispatcher tasked with
filing cleared warrants.
o The original warrant (once pulled from the packet) will need to be signed by the recovering/arresting officer
(if the recovery or arrest is made by our agency), and then placed into the appropriate court box for return
to the court of origin. The III and OLN return you pulled from the packet will need to be shredded.
o If the clearance of a wanted person is due to an outside agency arrest, you’ll need to return the original
from your packet to the court of origin. In addition, you will need to notify the court as to which agency
arrested the subject.
§ Fill out the “Warrant Clearance” form and place it in the box for the court of origin, in addition to
returning the original warrant. This form can be found on the Server at the following location:
R:\Dispatch Forms > WORK FORMS >NCIC ENTRY FORMS & WARRANT COVER SHEETS.
Select either Magistrate or Muni Warrant forms (dependent on which court issued the warrant, and
then select the warrant clearance form.
ADMINISTRATIVE MESSAGES
v From time to time, you will have to send messages to other agencies, or to regions. Generally, these messages
include details about wanted persons, welfare check subjects, training announcements, line of duty death
announcements, road closures, etc. In these cases, you will need to utilize the Administrative Message (AM)
switch.
o All Administrative Messages sent regarding validations, as well as all AMs from Santa Fe will need to be
printed and held for the TAC.
v AMs may NOT be sent to convey holiday wishes or any other messages of a personal nature.
v Once the Administrative Message file on the left-hand side of the OpenFox Messenger screen has been opened,
you will need to select which type of AM you need to send. Our agency primarily uses Broadcast Messages and
Fatal Messages.
o BROADCAST MESSAGE: Most AMs are going to be this type.
§ Broadcast Messages are used to send BOLO/ATL teletypes, and general information teletypes to
other agencies with NCIC terminals. In order to send a Broadcast Message, you’ll need to select
either Broadcast Message, Broadcast Message-Mile Radius (to be used when the AM is more
localized) or Broadcast Message-New Mexico (for NM APB teletypes)
§ Broadcast Messages are what will be used when sending out ATL teletypes for missing persons,
stolen vehicles, etc.
§ Once you’ve selected the proper form, you’ll have to fill in the following information
• Destination: Can be by State, or by specific ORI
o EX: NM or NM0140300
• Control Field: The operator’s first initial and last name (JDOE)
• Message #: Obtained from the NCIC book next to the booking recorders. This number
will begin with “R” and be followed by a 4-digit, sequential, numeric code. Be sure to
check the book and assign the next sequential number to your AM. (You’ll also need to
log the AM transaction into the book when you collect the Message #.)
• Date: Date that you are sending the message

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

EXTENDED NCIC OVERVIEW

o

BROADCAST MESSAGES, CONT.’D
• To: This is a free-form field that usually includes the specific agency, or area to which you
are sending the Broadcast Message.
• Attention: This can be filled in if the AM needs to be directed to a specific division, or
person, but is not required
• Text Field: Free form field that contains the actual message for NCIC dissemination.
• Authorization: Officer Authorizing or requesting the AM/Broadcast Message
dissemination.
• Time: Time that AM was sent
• Agency/City: Ruidoso Police Department
• Operator: Your initials, or badge number.
§ Once the AM Broadcast Message has been sent, you’ll need to place a copy in the file designated
for AMs/Teletypes (next to the NCIC book in dispatch).
§ You may also place a copy of the AM in the report file it is associated with.
§ To cancel or update at Broadcast Message (as in the case of a missing person/stolen vehicle, etc.
being located), repeat the procedure for entry of Broadcast AM, only include *** UPDATE *** or
*** CANCEL *** at the beginning of the Text Field as appropriate.
• For ease, when complete initial entry of the Broadcast Message is done, select the small
form icon at the top left corner of the AM-Broadcast Message window and select Save to
Drafts. When time to cancel or update the message, just select the appropriate Broadcast
Message in your Draft Folder (Under User Folders on left hand side of the OpenFox
screen) and simply add the UPDATE or CANCEL indicator in the Text Field.

o

FATAL FORM
§ Whenever our agency handles a motor vehicle crash in which a fatality or fatalities are involved,
we are required to send out a FATAL TELETYPE.
§ To send out a fatal teletype, select Fatal Form under the Administrative Message folder and enter
the following information:
• Message #: Obtained from the NCIC book next to the booking recorders. This number
will begin with “R” and be followed by a 4-digit, sequential, numeric code. Be sure to
check the book and assign the next sequential number to your AM. (You’ll also need to
log the AM transaction into the book when you collect the Message #.)
• Accident Date: Date that the MVC occurred.
• Time of Accident: Time that the MVC was reported to have occurred.
• County: Lincoln
• Location: Address of the reported MVC
• Involvement: Type of accident (i.e.: Vehicle vs. Pedestrian, 2 Vehicle, Vehicle vs. Wildlife
etc.)
• Pedestrian/# of Vehicles/Liquor Involved/Seatbelt Used: Fill in appropriately, as
related to the details of the MVC provided by the reporting officer.
• Vehicle License/State/Make/Model/Year: Fill in appropriately for each separate vehicle
involved in the MVC
• Victim Name/DOB/City/State of Resd/Dispositon/Next of Kin: Fill in appropriately for
each and every person involved, whether injured, deceased, or uninjured.
• Investigating Officer: Name/Rank of Officer handling the report.
• Medical Examiner: Name of Medical Examiner that reported to the scene.
• Narrative: Free-form field to include a brief description of what occurred during the MVC.
This should be dictated by the investigating officer or supervisor.
• Authorization: Chief of Police or Patrol Lieutenant
• Agency/City: Ruidoso Police Department
• Time: Time teletype sent
• Respond to ORI: NM0140100
• Operator: Your initials or badge number.

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

EXTENDED NCIC OVERVIEW
o

AMBER ALERT
§ Amber Alert teletypes are named after Amber Hagerman, who was abducted and killed in
Arlington, TX in 1996.
§ Amber Alerts are issued in the case of a confirmed Child Abduction, where it is believed the child
is in danger.
§ Amber Alerts are handled by the New Mexico State Police. Therefore, they will be sent out by the
NMSP in the case that our agency requests an Amber Alert.

ARTICLE
v During the course of your duties, you will sometimes be required to enter items as stolen. All items that are not
guns, license plates, or vehicles will be entered as ARTICLES.
v Every NCIC entry (except Missing Person – explained later) requires the following to be present prior to
communications making entry:
o A signed theft affidavit, a copy of the incident reports with narrative, an NCIC validation form and an article
query.
v To enter an article into NCIC as stolen/lost, follow these steps:
o Select the Add/Enter folder on the left side of your OpenFox Messenger screen, then select Enter
Article(s).
o You will have several options. Select the appropriate option for the type of article entry you are making.
o Complete the following fields in the ARTICLE ENTRY screen.
§ Control Field: Your first initial and last name (EX: JDOE)
§ Date of Theft: Date the article was believed to be stolen/lost.
§ Agency Case #: The S number on the report.
§ Type: This is a drop down menu that will have the NCIC specific code for the type of articles you
are entering. You may also access this list by referencing the NCIC books on the back wall in
dispatch.
• The Type Code will begin a single letter, designating the Type Category. Categories can
be located in your Communications Reference Sheets.
§ Brand Name: Drop down menu contains NCIC specific code for Brand names
§ Serial # / Owner Applied #: At least ONE of these fields must be filled in.
• If the article was a part of a set, with sequential serial numbers, use Stolen or Lost Article
Consecutive Group. This screen will provide you with the option to enter the range of
serial numbers stolen/lost.
§ Model: Model name or number of article – not required, but recommended
§ Hazardous Material Container: Only when applicable – not required
§ Lot #: Optional, only when applicable – not required
§ Lot Indicator: C (Complete) or (P) Partial – only required when Lot # is filled in
§ UNN#: Numeric code listed in NLETS Haz Mat file
§ Notify Agency: N
§ Linkage Agency ID: Only used if article was stolen as part of a cross-jurisdictional criminal incident
in which another agency has related stolen articles also listed/reported as stolen.
§ Linkage Agency Case #: OCA/Case number of other agency’s article entry
§ MISC: Free form field used to give further details/identifiers on the article listed as lost/stolen
v Once your entry has been completed, you will need to print two copies of the NCIC entry TTY. One copy will be
attached to the entry packet, after which the entire packet will be placed in the next shift’s folder for second party
check. The second copy will be given to the reporting officer to attach to his report.

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

EXTENDED NCIC OVERVIEW
GUN
v GUN entries are made when a gun has been reported as lost or stolen. (NOTE: NCIC considers BB guns to be
articles, not guns.)
v Every NCIC entry (except Missing Person – explained later) requires the following to be present prior to
communications making entry:
o A signed theft affidavit, a copy of the incident reports with narrative, an NCIC validation form and a gun
query.
v To enter a gun, follow these steps:
o Select the Add/Enter folder on the left side of your OpenFox Messenger screen, then select Enter Gun.
o You will have several options. Select the appropriate option for the type of gun entry you are making.
o NOTE: You will use this when a gun has been recovered, and no ownership is known.
o Complete the following fields in the GUN ENTRY screen.
§ Control Field: Your first initial and last name (EX: JDOE)
§ Agency Case #: The S number on the report.
§ Date of Theft: Date the gun was believed to be stolen/lost.
§ Serial #: Serial number on the gun
§ Caliber: Valid NCIC caliber code
§ Type: This is a drop down menu with NCIC specific code for the type of gun being entered.
§ Model: Model name or number of gun – not required, but recommended
§ Notify Agency: Y
§ Linkage Agency ID: Only used if gun was stolen as part of a cross-jurisdictional criminal incident
in which another agency has related stolen gun(s) also listed/reported as stolen.
§ Linkage Agency Case #: OCA/Case number of other agency’s gun entry
§ MISC: Free form field used to give further details/identifiers on the gun listed as lost/stolen
v Once your entry has been completed, you will need to print two copies of the NCIC entry. One copy will be attached
to the entry packet, after which the entire packet will be placed in the next shift’s folder for second party check. The
second copy will be given to the reporting officer to attach to his report.
v If there is pertinent information as to the whereabouts of the stolen gun, or information on suspects, a
BOLO teletype may be sent to surrounding agencies identifying them of a stolen or lost firearm that has
been reported.

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

EXTENDED NCIC OVERVIEW
LICENSE PLATE
v LICENSE PLATE entries are made when a license plate has been reported as lost or stolen.
v Every NCIC entry (except Missing Person – explained later) requires the following to be present prior to
communications making entry:
o A signed theft affidavit, a copy of the incident reports with narrative, an NCIC validation form and a license
plate query.
v To enter a license plate, follow these steps:
o Select the Add/Enter folder on the left side of your OpenFox Messenger screen, then select Enter License
plate.
o You will have several options. Select the appropriate option for the type of license plate entry you are
making.
o NOTE: You will use this when a license plate has been recovered, and no ownership is known.
o Complete the following fields in the LICENSE PLATE ENTRY screen.
§ Control Field: Your first initial and last name (EX: JDOE)
§ License #: License plate number on the stolen plate
§ License State: State out of which the license plate was issued
§ License Year: Year license plate is set to expire
§ License Type: Drop down menu with NCIC specific code for type of license plate being entered.
§ Agency Case #: The S number on the report.
§ Date of Theft: Date the license plate was believed to be stolen/lost.
§ Model: Model name or number of license plate – not required, but recommended
§ Notify Agency: N
§ Linkage Agency ID: Only used if license plate was stolen as part of a cross-jurisdictional criminal
incident in which another agency has related stolen license plate(s) also listed/reported as stolen.
§ Linkage Agency Case #: OCA/Case number of other agency’s license plate entry
§ MISC: Free form field used to give further details/identifiers on the license plate listed as lost/stolen
v Once your entry has been completed, you will need to print two copies of the NCIC entry. One copy will be attached
to the entry packet, after which the entire packet will be placed in the next shift’s folder for second party check. The
second copy will be given to the reporting officer to attach to his report.

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

EXTENDED NCIC OVERVIEW
VEHICLE PLATE
v VEHICLE entries are made when a vehicle has been reported as lost or stolen.
v Every NCIC entry (except Missing Person – explained later) requires the following to be present prior to
communications making entry:
o A signed theft affidavit, a copy of the incident reports with narrative, an NCIC validation form and a vehicle
query.
v To enter a vehicle, follow these steps:
o Select the Add/Enter folder on the left side of your OpenFox Messenger screen, then select Enter
Vehicle.
o You will have several options. Select the appropriate option for the type of vehicle entry you are making.
o Complete the following fields in the VEHICLE ENTRY screen.
§ Control Field: Your first initial and last name (EX: JDOE)
§ Date of Theft: Date vehicle was stolen
§ Agency Case #: The S number on the report.
§ License #: Vehicle number on the stolen plate
§ License State: State out of which the vehicle was issued
§ License Year: Year vehicle is set to expire
§ License Type: Drop down menu with NCIC specific code for type of vehicle being entered.
§ VIN #: Vehicle Identification Number on the stolen/felony vehicle
§ Vehicle Year: Year model of the stolen/felony vehicle
§ Vehicle Make: Drop down menu with NCIC specific code for make of vehicle being entered.
§ Vehicle Model: Drop down menu with NCIC specific code for model of vehicle being entered.
§ Vehicle Color(s): Drop down menu with NCIC specific code for color of vehicle being entered.
§ Notify Agency: Y
§ Linkage Agency ID: Only used if vehicle was stolen as part of a cross-jurisdictional criminal incident
in which another agency has related stolen vehicle(s) also listed/reported as stolen.
§ Linkage Agency Case #: OCA/Case number of other agency’s vehicle entry
§ MISC: Free form field used to give further details/identifiers on the vehicle listed as lost/stolen
v Once your entry has been completed, you will need to print two copies of the NCIC entry. One copy will be attached
to the entry packet, after which the entire packet will be placed in the next shift’s folder for second party check. The
second copy will be given to the reporting officer to attach to his report.
v A BOLO teletype should also be sent to pertinent ORIs/Regions to alert them of the stolen or felony vehicle.
If the felony or stolen vehicle is occupied, or occupants are believed to be armed/dangerous, rapid
dissemination of the information should be priority.

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

EXTENDED NCIC OVERVIEW
WANTED PERSON ENTRY
v One of the primary functions of the Communications Officer is the timely entry of wanted persons into the NCIC
system. Our agency enters warrants generated by both the Municipal and Magistrate Judges. We do not enter
felony warrants. Felony warrants, regardless of the agency or court of origin are entered by the Lincoln County
Sheriff’s Office.
BASIC ENTRY
v Upon receiving a warrant or warrant(s) from the court, the receiving shift (usually day shift) should time and date
stamp the warrants. An OLN check and III face page (containing the FBI number), as well as a NCIC III Full Record
Request should be run on the person listed on the warrant. The III Purpose Code should be entered as Magistrate
(or Municipal) Warrant entry and should include the warrant number to which the record pertains. The ATTN: field
should contain the dispatcher’s name (LASTNAME,FIRSTNAME). Entry should then be completed into NCIC
within the next 24 hours. The following is the procedure/protocol for wanted person entry:
o Begin entry by selecting Add/Enter folder on the left side of your OpenFox Messenger screen, then select
Enter Wanted Person.
o You will have several options. Select the appropriate option for the type of Wanted Person entry you are
making.
o Complete the following fields in the WANTED PERSON ENTRY screen.
§ Control Field: Your first initial and last name (EX: JDOE)
§ PERSONAL INFORMATION SECTION (personal info of wanted subject)
• Name: Name of the wanted person
• Sex: Gender of wanted person
• Race: Race of wanted person
o NOTE: “Hispanic” is not a valid NCIC listing for Race. Hispanics are considered
by the FBI to be Caucasian with Hispanic ethnicity. Enter Hispanics as
Caucasian.
• Place of Birth: 2-digit NCIC specific code for the State or Country of the wanted person’s
birth.
o This information is obtained from the NCIC III face sheet, and is NOT required if
not provided.
• Date of Birth: DOB of wanted person
o NOTE: If more than one DOB is found for the subject, the additional DOBs on file
will be entered as supplemental later.
• Date of Emancipation: Used when entering juveniles. Date juvenile will be considered (or
was) emancipated from parental/guardian control.
• Height: 3-digit numerical code for height of wanted person
• Weight: 3-digit numerical code for weight of wanted person
• Eye Color: Drop down menu for NCIC specific coding for eye color (Unknown = XXX)
• Hair Color: Drop down menu for NCIC specific coding for hair color (Unknown = XXX)
• FBI #: FBI number listed on III face sheet. It is not required if not provided/subject has no
III.
• Skin Tone: Drop down menu for NCIC specific coding for skin tone.
• Scars Marks Tattoos: drop down menu for NCIC specific coding for scars/marks/tattoos
listed on the III face sheet (or other identifying documents) for the wanted person.
o If more than one SMT is present, additional SMTs will be entered as supplemental
later.
• Miscellaneous #: Additional ID numbers/documents assigned to the wanted subject.
• Social Security #: SSN of the wanted person. Can be found on the OLN (if NM) or the III
face sheet.
• DNA: Y or N (Is there a DNA sample on file?)
• DNA Location: Location of DNA sample, contact information, ORI, type, and CODIS #
• Caution/Medical Condition: Drop down menu for NCIC specific coding for caution
indicators, or indicators of medical condition of the wanted person. (EX: Armed and
Dangerous, Diabetic, Escape Risk, Explosives expertise, etc.) Entry into this field will not
be utilized unless specified by officer/court of issuance.

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

EXTENDED NCIC OVERVIEW

WANTED PERSON ENTRY (cont’d.)
• Citizenship: Drop down menu for NCIC specific coding for citizenship location of wanted
subject.
§

OFFENSE INFORMATION
• Offense: Drop down menu for NCIC specific numerical code indicative of the offense for
which the warrant has been generated
o If the warrant is a fail to appear/fail to pay/violation of probation, you will be
required to also fill in the Original Offense Code, which should indicate the
original violation for which the wanted subject failed to appear/pay, etc.
• Original Offense Code: Drop down menu for NCIC specific numerical code indicative of
the original offense for which the wanted subject failed to appear in court, failed to pay
fines on, or violation conditions of probation or court order on.
• Date of Warrant: Date warrant was issued by the court (YYYYMMDD)
• Agency Case #: Located on the top portion of the warrant, same as Warrant No.
o Municipal Warrants will be the same as the warrant number.
o Magistrate Warrants format will start with M32, or M30 (indicating Ruidoso
Magistrate, or Carrizozo Magistrate), then be followed with MR, and the year
(2011, 2012, etc.), and finished with a 5-digit numeric code
• Warrant number: Located at the top of the warrant
o Municipal Warrants are 4-5 digits and numerical
o Magistrate Warrant numbers are the same as the Agency Case
• Court Identifier: Must be a valid NCIC assigned ORI. This is not generally utilized by our
agency during warrant entry.
• Notify Agency: N
• Extradition Limitation: Drop down menu for NCIC specific code regarding extradition
limitations for wanted person.
o Make sure you are using the coding under the MISDEMEANOR WARRANTS
section, as we do not entry felonies at this ORI.
o Except in rare cases, we will most always use D=No Extradition. This does not
mean that we will not extradite at all, it just means that extradition limitations
must be indicated in the MIS field.

§

Optional Linkage Information: Used when there are associated warrants out of other
agencies. We do not use these fields.

§

OPERATOR INFORMATION (of wanted subject)
• Operator License #: OLN number of the wanted subject
• Operator License State: State out of which wanted subject’s license is issued
• Expiration Year: Year in which the wanted subject’s OLN expires
LICENSE INFORMATION (for vehicles associated with wanted subject)
• This section is not generally utilized for most of the warrants we enter at this level.
However it may be used if the vehicle was used in the offense for which the subject is
now wanted, or if there is a high likelihood that the wanted subject may still be in the
vehicle. If the subject is armed and/or dangerous and in a vehicle, this is an
especially important section to be entered.
• License #: Plate number on the vehicle
• License State: State out of which the vehicle/plate is registered
• License Year: Year in which the registration expires/expired.
• License Type: Drop down menu with NCIC specific code for type of plate/registration
(Passenger Car, City Owned Vehicle, etc.)

§

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

EXTENDED NCIC OVERVIEW
WANTED PERSON ENTRY (cont’d.)
§ VEHICLE INFORMATION (for vehicles associated with wanted subject – may or may not bear a
license plate)
• This section is not generally utilized for most of the warrants we enter at this level.
However it may be used if the vehicle was used in the offense for which the subject is now
wanted, or if there is a high likelihood that the wanted subject may still be in the vehicle.
If the subject is armed and/or dangerous and in a vehicle, this is an especially
important section to be entered.
• VIN #: Vehicle Identification Number
• Vehicle Year: Year model of the vehicle
• Vehicle Make: Drop down menu with NCIC specific vehicle make codes
o NOTE: These codes may or may not match the MVD code used on the vehicle
return.
• Vehicle Model: Drop down menu with NCIC specific vehicle model codes
o NOTE: These codes may or may not match the MVD code used on the vehicle
return.
• Vehicle Style: Drop down menu with NCIC specific vehicle style codes
o NOTE: These codes may or may not match the MVD code used on the vehicle
return.
• Vehicle Color: Drop down menu with NCIC specific color codes
§

STOLEN/FRAUDULENT IDENTIFIER INFORMATION
• These fields are filled in when the wanted subject is in possession of, or utilizing stolen
identifiers.
• NOTE: This is not the same as known aliases of the wanted subject.

§

ADDRESS INFORMATION (OPTIONAL FOR ENTRY/NOT REQUIRED)
• This section is filled in with the last known location/address of the wanted subject.
Addresses can be several types. We do not generally utilize this field.
• Type: Drop down menu with NCIC specific codes for type of address.
o 01 – Residence: Last known residence of wanted person
o 02 – Employer: Employment address for wanted person
o 03 – Relative: Address for relative of wanted person
o 04 – Known Associate: Address for known associate of wanted person
o 05 – Other: Other address not covered by aforementioned description
o 06 – Homeless: Wanted person is homeless
o 07 – Transient: Wanted person is transient
• Documented Date: Last date on which the address for wanted subject was documented
• Street #: Numeric for street address (EX: 123 if the address is 123 Main St.)
• Street Name: Name of street and type (EX: Main St if the address is 123 Main St.)
• City Name: City in which last known address was in.
• State: State of last known address
• Zip Code: USPS zip code for last known address
• County: County in which subject was last known to reside. (EX: Lincoln, Otero, etc.)

§

MICELLANEOUS INFORMATION
• Free form field in which the extradition limitations, bond amount, and original charges
should be listed.

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

EXTENDED NCIC OVERVIEW
WANTED PERSON ENTRY (cont’d.)
SUPPLEMENTALS
v Once the initial entry of the wanted person has been completed, the Communications Officer should enter any
supplemental information or identifiers.
v Supplementals include such information as:
o Aliases/AKAs,
o multiple Scars/Marks/Tattoos,
o alternate Dates of Birth,
o additional Social Security Numbers,
o multiple Caution/Medical Condition indicators,
o Citizenship Status,
o additional OLNs,
o additional Vehicles/Vehicle License Plates,
o additional Last Known Addresses
o wanted subject images
v Supplementals are entered by going the Supplemental Folder on the left hand side of the OpenFox Menu screen and
double clicking. A drop down menu will appear, allowing you to choose whether you want to enter, modify or cancel a
supplemental. Choose the appropriate menu and enter the fields in the same format you would use as on the original
Wanted entry.
MODIFY ENTRY
v If, once you have made an entry, you determine there is an error or change that needs to be made on the ORIGINAL
wanted entry, you will be required to modify the entry by selecting the MODIFY folder on the far left hand side of the
OpenFox Messenger screen. Select the record you want to modify, fill in the NCIC number and modify the fields that
need correction.
o NOTE: Modification of the supplementals must be made under the Supplemental folder.
WANTED PERSON ENTRY PACKET
v Once the subject has been entered into NCIC and SLEUTH as wanted, the Communications officer will complete a
Warrant Entry Cover Sheet and Warrant Entry Validation Sheet (located on the server at: S:\Dispatch Forms\WORK
FORMS\NCIC ENTRY FORMS & WARRANT COVER SHEETS), and then assemble the Warrant Packet.
v The warrant packet should contain the following:
o Warrant Entry Cover Sheet
o NCIC print out of wanted person hit
o NCIC entry receipt teletype
o Wanted person’s OLN return
o Wanted person’s III face sheet (or sheet indicating there is NO III)
o Original (signed by the judge) warrant/extradition authorization
o Warrant Entry Validation Sheet.
v The assembled packet should then be placed in the next shift’s folder for second party check. Once it has been second
party checked for accuracy (and corrections made, if required), it will be filed in the warrant cabinet alphabetically by
last name.

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

EXTENDED NCIC OVERVIEW

WANTED PERSONS VALIDATIONS
NCIC/NMLETS defines validation as the obligation of the ORI to confirm that the record is complete, accurate and still
outstanding or active. Validations are the responsibility of the terminal agency, through the TAC, to ensure that all records
entered by the agency are validated in a complete and timely manner. All NCIC entries and data must not contain any
erroneous information. The TAC will ensure that all records/data entered are as accurate as possible at the time of entry.
If additional and/or more accurate information becomes available at a later time, the TAC will ensure that the original
information is updated.
The TAC may validate the records or forward the validations to other personnel for assistance.
v Upon receiving a validation, you will run OLN check and III face page (containing the FBI number). NCIC III Full
Record Request should be run on the person listed on the warrant. The III reason should be entered as (wx
validations and should include the warrant number.)
The ATTN: field should contain the dispatcher’s name (LASTNAME,FIRSTNAME).
v When running the FBI Number, make sure all SID Numbers returned on the FBI Query. If all SID Numbers return,
only print the FBI full return. If there are missing SID Number(s), the dispatcher should only run the one that is
missing. It is not necessary to run every SID Number individually.
o Example: SID Numbers on the FBI show NM, CO, TX and AZ. When the FBI Query is run only NM, CO
and TX return. This will require running the individual AZ SID Number.
v The older OLN & III returns in the packet must be removed and shredded.
v DO NOT remove the old entry/supplemental/modification receipts. Those will remain in the packet and be added
to the new ones.
v The new OLN & III information should be compared to the information on the current NCIC Wanted Persons hit.
Use the new OLN and III to modify the warrant entry with the most updated information available.
o Example: f the driver’s license is more up to date than the III, then update the warrant with all the
information from the driver’s license.
v Once all modifications and additional supplementals have been entered, print those entry receipts and add them
to the warrant packet, along with the originals.
v Re-query wanted person by NIC number (not by OLN or NAM/DOB). Print the new NCIC Wanted Persons hit and
add it to the packet.
v Write “Modify CO:” along with your name, and the date/time of the modification on cover sheet, and leave for the
TAC (or party designated by the TAC) for second party check.
v If needed, refer to the Communications Manual references on how to enter/modify/supplement a Wanted Person
entry.

Any questions or concerns regarding validations should be addressed with the TAC. The TAC will have the final
word and authority regarding Validations/Entries in NCIC, in accordance with policy from Santa Fe and the FBI
NICS Center.

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

EXTENDED NCIC OVERVIEW
MISSING PERSON ENTRY
v Federal rules require that Police Departments, upon notification of a person missing, it is required to have the subject
entered into the NCIC database within 2 hours of the report as missing. For the first 24 hrs. following a report, the CAD
call sheet can be substituted for the report.
v Upon receiving a missing persons packet for entry from the officer, the Communications Officer should check the
packet to assure the following is included:
o
o
o
o

A person’s/OLN check on the missing subject
A copy of the original offense report (a call card will suffice for this portion for the first 24 hours after entry.)
A completed copy of the NM Vital Records birth certificate flag request form
A completed copy of the NM DPS Missing Persons Clearinghouse report form.

IF POSSIBLE TO OBTAIN WITHIN ENTRY TIME-LIMIT CONSTRAINTS:
o Complete medical and dental history form.
v If these items are present, then the communications officer should enter the missing person as expediently as possible,
and then send out an additional AM-BOLO teletype that details the missing person’s identifiers, possible destination (if
known), and missing circumstances.
v Missing Persons entry fields should be completed the same way a Wanted Person would be. Any and all identifiers
able to be obtained, either by persons NCIC check, or by field units and reporting parties should be entered. All
supplemental identifiers should be entered in the same manner as well. Modifications on Missing Persons are handled
the same way modifications for Wanted Persons are entered.
v Once the entry and teletype have been sent, the Birth Certificate Flag Request Form, as well as the NM DPS Missing
Persons Clearinghouse Report From should be appropriate NM State offices. Both forms should be completed by the
Reporting Officer. The Birth Certificate Flag Form should be faxed to the State Registrar at 505-827-1751, and then
placed in the mail to the NM Vital Records and Health Statistics office at PO Box 26110, Santa Fe, NM 87502. The
Missing Person Clearinghouse Report Form should be mailed to the Missing Persons Clearinghouse Manager, NM
DPS, Missing Persons Information Clearinghouse Law Enforcement Records Bureau, PO Box 1628, Santa Fe, NM
87504.
o

When subject is located the following must be performed:
§ Physical verification of the person’s return by a law enforcement officer. (I.e. The subject must be
physically verified as returned home by the police.)
§ Removal of the subject from NCIC
§ Officer-completed Birth Certificate Flag Cancellation Form faxed and mailed to the State Registrar,
and the NM DPS Missing Persons Clearinghouse notified of the recovery.

v Once the person has been entered into NCIC as missing, a copy of the Missing Persons NCIC Entry receipt should be
forwarded to the Reporting Officer and the packet submitted to the next incoming shift for second party check, and file.

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

NCIC PROCEDURAL UPDATES
Listed below are NCIC changes/updates.
v Validations
o When running the FBI Number, make sure all SID Numbers returned on the FBI Query. If all SID Numbers
return, we only have to print the full FBI return. If there are missing SID Number(s), we only need to run
the one that is missing. We no longer have to run every SID Number.
• Example – SID Numbers on the FBI show NM, CO, TX and AZ. When the FBI Query is run only
NM, CO and TX return. This will require running the individual AZ SID Number.
v When responding to hits from agencies outside of Lincoln County, NM, wherein the warrant extradition limitations
are listed as “Lincoln County Only,” then the confirmation status entry should be NO.
o We will not respond with “Yes” just because the WX is valid. If it is Non-Extraditable, then put “No” for –
Not Confirmed for Extradition. This is for any WX that is Non-Extraditable. You may indicate in the
remarks section that the warrant is valid, but non-extraditable.
v Any time an employee’s family member is run, a memorandum to the Supervisor must be completed.
o We cannot prevent it when an Officer may request a family member via traffic stop or T28 check when
we are by ourselves or the Officer does not know our family members. If traced back via audit, our
Supervisor will have it on file with an explanation.
v We must stress to Officers signing out Triple I’s that it must be either given back to us or shredded. Triple I cannot
be placed in the files in the Records Office. The DA is not to see the III.
o
o

Officers at times are taking these files with them to court and this sensitive information from NCIC cannot
be release or seen. As they do not have clearance, they are not to have access.
It is also a violation of privacy.

v Do not release Gang information over the air.
o It is a secure FBI file that we cannot transmit via an unsecured radio channel. Let the Officer know that
there is important information, but they will need to call for information, just like we do for Triple I.

COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER MANUAL

REQUIREMENTS FOR THE TAC
v $P messages must be printed and put in the TAC’s box. These messages indicate that something was purged
from NCIC and the TAC must keep them.
v You should be reading ALL AM Messages. If it is an AM Message from Santa Fe, print it for the TAC, as they
must be retained for 1 year.
v AM Messages that come across about Validations will also need to be printed and held for the TAC.
v On occasion, an officer or detective requests a driver license picture emailed. It is acceptable to email the
PHOTO ONLY. The email cannot include the name or DOB.
v Reminder: Faxing or email any NCIC information is forbidden.
v Running III: When running III for Officers, be sure in the ATN box that it is the Officers name
(LASTNAME,FIRSTNAME).
o The REASON field must contain a brief reason as well as the S# or PD#
• EX: HOMICIDE S190000548
v If you are running a III for Employment the Purpose Code is J, and your reason will be Employment/Officer, or
Employment/Dispatch. Keep in mind if we get audited the TAC will need to be able to produce the reason the III
was run.
v OFFICERS MAY NOT LEAVE DISPATCH WITH A III WITHOUT SIGNING IT OUT.
v All cancellations on warrants that are received from the court will require copy of the cancellation included in the
clear packet.
v When leaving Dispatch you should be locking your NCIC terminal. You can easily do this with the F12 key.

REFERENCE SHEETS

REFERENCE SHEET (WRECKER COMPANIES)

Arrow Towing
128 Mesa Heights, Alto 88312
575-973-3838
575-937-6164

Downs Towing
26520 US Highway 70, Ruidoso Downs 88346
575-378-8315
575-378-7120
575-937-1754

Herrera Towing (CLASS D/HEAVY ONLY)
264 Rancher Rd., Ruidoso Downs 88346
575-973-0637

OTHER AGENCY NUMBERS
NOTE: The following numbers are some of the most commonly used by dispatch. It IS NOT a complete list of all NM law enforcement
agencies.

AGENCY

ADDRESS

ALAMOGORDO DPS

700 Virginia
Alamogordo, NM 88310

P: 575-439-4300
F: 575-439-4305

NM0190100
NM0190101

BIA/MESCALERO LE

604 Lipan Av.
Mescalero, NM 88340

P: 575-464-4479
F: 575-464-4430

NMDI07000

CHAVES COUNTY SO

PO Box 1396
Roswell, NM 88201

P: 575-624-7590
F: 575-624-6518

NM0030000

LAS CRUCES PD

200 Picacho Av.
Las Cruces, NM 88004

P: 575-526-0795
F: 575-528-4136

NM0070100

LINCOLN CO. DETENTION

200 Central Av.
Carrizozo, NM 88301

P: 575-648-6510
F: 575-648-6520

Use LCSO

LINCOLN COUNTY SO

300 Central Av.
Carrizozo, NM 88301

P: 800-687-2419 (toll free)
P: 575-648-2341
F: 575-648-2862

NM0140000

NM STATE POLICE

PHN/FAX NUMBERS

NLETS ORI

P: 1-888-442-6677 (Statewide)

ALAMOGORDO (D-8)

411 Tenth St.
Alamogordo, NM 88310

P: 575-439-5714
F: 575-434-4661

NMNSP0800

ALBUQUERQUE (D-5)

2501 Carlisle NE
Albuquerque, NM 87110

P: 505-841-9256 (option 3)
F: 505-541-9249

NMNSP0500

LAS CRUCES (D-4)

3000 E. University
Las Cruces, NM 88001

P: 575-382-2511
F: 575-382-2588

NMNSP0400

ROSWELL (D-3)

4207 W. Second St.
Roswell, NM 88201

P: 575-622-7200
F: 575-623-6423

NMNSP0300

SOCORRO (D-11)

PO Box 1455
Socorro, NM 87801

P: 575-835-0741
F: 575-835-3114

NMNSP1100

P: 575-443-2944, ext. 230

Use OCSO

OTERO CO. DETENTION
OTERO COUNTY SO

3208 N. White Sands Bv.
Alamogordo, NM 88310

P: 575-437-2210
F: 575-443-2937

NM0190000

RUIDOSO DOWNS DPS

122 Downs Dr.
Ruidoso Downs, NM 88346

P: 575-378-4421 (Reg. Line)
P: 575-378-4001 (Emer. Line)
F: 575-378-8460

NM0140300

ROSWELL PD

PO Box 1994
Roswell, NM 88201

P: 575-624-7590
F: 575-624-6780

NM0030100
NM0030101
NM0030102

TULAROSA PD

609B St. Francis Dr.
Tularosa, NM 88352

P: 575-585-2704
F: 575-858-2754

NM0190200

RADIO 10-CODES

CODE

DEFINITION

CODE

DEFINITION

10-1
10-2
10-3
10-4
10-5
10-6
10-7
10-8
10-9

RECEIVING POORLY
RECEIVING WELL
STOP TRANSMITTING
OK/ACKNOWLEDGED
RELAY MESSAGE/ITEM
BUSY
OUT OF SERVICE/OFF-DUTY
INSERVICE/ON-DUTY
REPEAT

10-46
10-47
10-48
10-49
10-50
10-51
10-52
10-53
10-54

10-10
10-11
10-12
10-13
10-14
10-15
10-16
10-17
10-18
10-19
10-20
10-21
10-22
10-23
10-24
10-25
10-26
10-27
10-28
10-29
10-30

10-55
10-56
10-57
10-58
10-59
10-60
10-61
10-62
10-63
10-65
10-66
10-67
10-70
10-72
10-73
10-75
10-80
10-81
10-82
10-83
10-84

10-31
10-32
10-33
10-34
10-35
10-36

OUT OF SVC, AVAIL FOR CALL
DISPATCHING TOO RAPIDLY
VISITOR PRESENT
WEATHER/ROAD CONDITIONS
ESCORT
PRISONER IN CUSTODY
PICK UP PRISONER AT…
TRAFFIC HAZARD
LIVESTOCK IN ROADWAY
RETURN TO STATION
LOCATION
CONTACT BY PHONE
DISREGARD/CANCEL
STANDBY
TROUBLE AT STATION
CONTACT WITH
NO EMERGENCY EQUIPMENT
ANSWER REFERENCE ?
REGISTRATION CHECK
WANTS/WARRANTS CHECK
DOES NOT CONFORM TO FCC
STANDARDS
BOMB THREAT
DEMONSTRATION
EMERGENCY TRAFFIC
CLEAR FOR LOCAL DISPATCH
CONFIDENTIAL
CORRECT TIME?

WRECKER NEEDED AT…
IMPAIRED/INTOX. DRIVER
USE CAUTION
ANY TRAFFIC?
NO TRAFFIC
INDUSTRIAL ACCIDENT
DROWNING
CLEAR OF LOCATION
A. STOPPED DANGEROUS VEHICLE
AT…
AMBULANCE REQUESTED AT…
CHANGE LOCATION
IMPAIRED/INTOX PEDESTRIAN
MENTAL PATIENT, VIOLENT
MENTAL PATIENT, NON-VIOLENT
OFFICER IN TROUBLE, EMERG. ASSIST
OFFICER INJURED AT…
STATE POLICE INVOLVED IN ACCIDENT
OMI (CORONER) REQUESTED AT…
CLEAR FOR MESSAGE
CANCELLATION
STATION… CARRY THIS MESSAGE
B. CRIME IN PROGRESS
PLACE ROADBLOCK AT…
LIFT ROADBLOCK
STOLEN VEHICLE
ARMED AND DANGEROUS
OFFICER AT STATION
RESERVATIONS FOR OFFICER
UNDERCOVER INVESTIGATION
INFORMANT IN UNIT

10-37
10-38
10-39
10-40
10-41
10-42
10-43
10-44
10-45

OPERATOR
SEND MECHANIC TO…
CIVIL DEFENSE TRAFFIC
PROGRESS ON ASSIGNMENT
OPPOSITE GENDER
RESIDENCE/HOME
DRAG RACING AT…
ACCIDENT WITHOUT INJURY
ACCIDENT WITH INJURY

10-93
10-94
10-95
10-96
10-97
10-98
10-100

10-85
10-87
10-88
10-90
10-91
10-92

SURVEIL VEHICLE, DO NOT STOP
CAN YOU MEET AT… ?
ADVISE PHONE NUMBER
SP AIRCRAFT GOING DOWN, LOCATION
SP AIRCRAFT EMERGENCY LANDING
SP AIRCRAFT FLIGHT PLAN AT…
TIME…
SP AIRCRAFT IN ADVERSE WEATHER
SP AIRCRAFT GOING TO FAA FREQ
SP AIRCRAFT ON GROUND, LOCATION
CAMPUS UNREST
ARRIVED ON SCENE
LAST ASSIGNMENT COMPLETED
RIOT CONDITIONS EXIST

RADIO 900-CODES
CODE
1
2
3
4
5
6
6F
7
8
10
20
30
900
901
902
903
904
905
906
907
908
909
910
911
912
913
914
915
916
917
918
919
920
921
922
923
924
925
926
927
933
999

DEFINITION
YOUR CONVENIENCE
URGENT: NO SIREN, REDS OPTIONAL
URGENT: SIRENS AND REDS REQUIRED
OK, NO FURTHER ASSISTANCE NEEDED
STAKE OUT
MISDEMEANOR WARRANT
FELONY WARRANT
MEAL BREAK
PERSONAL BREAK/CALL OF NATURE
OFF-DUTY, IN OFFICIAL VEHICLE
S.R.T. CALL OUT
ALL DEPARTMENTAL PERSONNEL CALL OUT
INVESTIGATION
MURDER/HOMICIDE
RAPE/CSP/CSC
ROBBERY
AGG. ASSAULT/BATTERY
BURGLARY
THEFT/EMBEZZLEMENT
SHOOTING
CUTTING/STABBING
FORGERY OR COUNTERFEITING
KIDNAPPING/ABDUCTION
SHOPLIFTING
VANDALISM
DISTURBANCE/DISORDERLY
SUSPICIOUS
FAMILY FIGHT/DOMESTIC
FIGHT IN PROGRESS
NEIGHBOR DISPUTE
ADMINISTRATIVE ASSIGNMENT
PICK UP ITEM AT…
MESSAGE FOR DELIVERY
ALARM SOUNDING AT…
TRAFFIC CONTROL
CHECK DRIVERS HISTORY/LICENSE
SEX OFFENDER
REPORT TAKEN
MISSING PERSON
DEAD BODY OR SUICIDE
REQUEST FOR COVER/BACK-UP
OFFICER TAKEN HOSTAGE

PHONETIC ALPHABET

LETTER

PHONETIC

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
W
X
Y
Z

ADAM
BOY
CHARLES
DAVID
EDWARD
FRANK
GEORGE
HENRY
IDA
JOHN
KING
LINCOLN
MARY
NORA
OCEAN
PAUL
QUEEN
ROBERT
SAM
TOM
UNION
VICTOR
WILLIAM
X-RAY
YOUNG
ZEBRA

MARK OUT CODES

CODE

DEFINITION

10
19
23
42
56
87
97
AD
C7
C8
CP
CT
FP
FU
IS
OF
ON
SS
T6
TR
TS
SY
VM

CODE 10
10-19
10-23
10-42
10-56
10-87
10-97
918
CODE 7
CODE 8
CLOSE PATROL
COURT
FOOT PATROL
FOLLOW UP
INVESTIGATIVE STOP
OFF DUTY
ON DUTY
SUBJECT STOP
10-6
TRAINING MARKOUT
TRAFFIC STOP
STATIONARY
VEHICLE MAINTENANCE

CALL CATEGORY CODES

CATEGORY CODE

TYPE OF CALLS

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
W
X
Y
Z

Accidents
Miscellaneous
Alarms
EMS/Medical
Assist agency
Forgery/Counterfeit
Disturbances
Domestic related
Transports/Escorts
Fire Calls
Possible Shots
Lost/Missing
Mental
Service Calls
Other Criminal Activity
Personal Violence
Drug/Alcohol Violations
Dead Body
Suspicious
Theft
Traffic Control
Unsecured
Criminal Damage/Vandalism
Warrants
Animal Calls
Special Response

TDD (Telecommunications Device for the Deaf) PROTOCOL

There are some etiquette rules that users of TDDs must be aware of.

BRB
CA
CU
GA
SK
SKSK
Q, QQ, QM
PLS
RO
OIC
OPR
NBR
TMW
THX
WRU
XXXX

Commonly used abbreviations:
Be Right Back
Communications assistant (another term for a relay operator)
See You (be seeing you)
Go Ahead
Stop Keying
Stop Keying, Now hanging up
Question Mark (?)
Please
Relay Operator
Oh, I See
Operator
Number
Tomorrow
Thanks
Who are You? (or Where are You?)
Xs are often used to indicate a typing error instead of backspacing

ASAP
HD, HLD
ASST
BIZ
IMPT
INC
CD, CLD
MSG
DR
MISC
FIG
MTG

Common Terms:
As soon as possible
Hold
Assistant
Business
Important
Incomplete
Could
Message
Doctor
Miscellaneous
Figures
Meeting

Sample TDD conversation:
PSAP: RUIDOSO AREA 911, WHAT IS YOUR EMERGENCY Q GA
Caller: I AM AT 301 WALNUT DR AND HAVE SEEN FLASHING LIGHTS IN THE AREA FOR AN HOUR GA
PSAP: DO YOU KNOW WHERE THE LIGHTS ARE COMING FROM Q GA
Caller: BEHIND MY HOUSE SOMEWHERE MAYBE ALONG GAVILAN CANYON ROAD GA
PSAP: OK, WE WILL SEND AN OFCR TO CHECK WOULD YOU LIKE THE OFCR TO CONTACT YOU Q GA
Caller: NO THAT IS NOT NECESSARY. THANK YOU SK
PSAP: YOU ARE WELCOME CALL BACK IF THE SITUATION CHANGES SKSK
SK is used to allow the users to say their farewells, while SKSK indicates an immediate call hang-up.

Note: TDDs use only capital letters.

US POSTAL STATE CODES
STATE
Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri

USPS CODE
AL
AK
AZ
AR
CA
CO
CT
DE
FL
GA
HI
ID
IL
IN
IA
KS
KY
LA
ME
MD
MA
MI
MN
MS
MO

STATE
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming

USPS CODE
MT
NE
NV
NH
NJ
NM
NY
NC
ND
OH
OK
OR
PA
RI
SC
SD
TN
TX
UT
VT
VA
WA
WV
WI
WY

RUIDOSO PD OFFICER ROSTER

CALL

RANK

POSITION

600
633
635

Chief
Lieutenant
Lieutenant

Admin.
Patrol
Admin.

Hooker,Darren
Frost, Aaron
Chavez, Lawrence

Dept. Director

617
610
636

Sergeant
Detective
Detective

Criminal
Criminal
Criminal

Weaver,Michael
Cox, Neal
Bryant, Chris

CID Supv.

611
612
613
614
615
618
620
621
622
623
624
625
626
627
628
629
630
632
634

Corporal
Officer
Officer
Officer
Officer
Sergeant
Officer
Officer
Officer
Corporal
Officer
Officer
Officer
Officer
Corporal
Officer
Officer
Sergeant
Sergeant

Patrol
Patrol
Patrol
Patrol
Patrol
Patrol
Patrol
Patrol
Patrol
Patrol
Patrol
Patrol
Patrol
Patrol
Patrol
Patrol
Patrol
Patrol
Patrol

Hildman, Daniel
Beltran,Sal

651
652

Officer
Officer

ACO / Code Enf.
ACO / Code Enf.

Eisenberg, Chris
Simpson, Bobby

CO1
CO2
CO3
CO4
CO5
CO6
CO7
CO8
CO9

Civilian
Civilian
Civilian
Civilian
Civilian
Civilian
Civilian
Civilian
Civilian

Communications
Communications
Communications
Communications
Communications
Communications
Communications
Communications
Communications

Bullion, Kelly
Simpson, Katy
Neal, Dee Dee
Aker, Victoria
Marshall, Ty
Eisenberg, Kate
Alvillar, Miriam

607

Civilian
Civilian
Civilian

Evidence Custodian
Records Clerk
Admin. Secretary

608

NAME

EXTRA ASSGN

SRO

Rodela,Brenden
Kesterson,Flint
Ledford, Lance
Wall, Bowe
Larson,Craig
Eikanger,Randy
Bailey, Joseph
Green,Hannah
Randolph,Patrick
Heidbreder,Aaron
Freeman,Tillman
Green,Jonathan
Minner,Steve
Urban,James

Smith, Nancy
Davis, Natalie

Trainer
NCIC TAC/Disp Supv
Trainer

RUIDOSO PD PHONE EXTENSIONS

EXT

ID #

EXT

CO2

1144
1131
1101
1103
1104
1121
1133

ADMIN
HILLARY/EVIDENCE
CONF ROOM
NATALIE DAVIS
CHIEF HOOKER
LT. FROST
LT CHAVEZ
FINGERPRINT STATION

1110
1125
1154
1142

CID/NEU
CID COMMON
WEAVER
COX
VACANT

1123
1118
1119

PATROL SIDE
PATROL 1
PATROL 2
SGT OFFICE

DISPATCH
DISPATCH SUPV
DISPATCH 1 (E)
DISPATCH 2 (C)
DISPATCH 3 (W)
911 OFFICE
BOOKING
ACO/CODE ENF

651/652

1137
1128
1150
1161
1117
1160
1158
1162
1143
1115

OFFICER VOICEMAIL
(in order by badge #)
HILDMAN
BELTRAN
VACANT
RODELA
KESTERSON
LEDFORD
WALL
LARSON
EIKANGER
BAILEY
GREEN,H.
RANDOLPH
HEIDBREDER
FREEMAN
GREEN,J.
MINNER
URBAN

611
612
613
614
615
618
620
621
622
623
625
626
627
628
630
632
634

1150

OFFICER VOICEMAIL
(alphabetical by name)
BAILEY

1141

BELTRAN

623
613
612

1137
1128
1158
1160
1161
1162
1138
1155
7854
1120
1143
1117
1148
1115

LARSON
EIKANGER
FREEMAN
HEIDBREDER
GREEN,H
GREEN,J.
HILDMAN
KESTERSON
KNIGHT
LEDFORD
MINNER
RANDOLPH
RODELA
URBAN

621
622
628
627
625
630
611
615
620
618
632
626
614
634

1146
1102
1105
1107
1109
1134
1130

1138
1141
1148
1155
1120

ID #

607
608
600
633
635

617
610
636

